113
Chapter 4
Supply, demand and
freight rates
One complexity is ever-present in every management problem, every
decision, every action—not, properly speaking a fourth task of
management, and yet an additional dimension: time. Management always
has to consider both the present and the future; both the short run and the
long.
(Peter Drucker, ‘Management: Tasks, Responsibilities,
Practices’ 1977)
Chapter 4

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
114
4.1 The shipping market model
The search for signposts
Now it is time to look in greater detail at the economic mechanisms which the
shipping market uses to regulate supply and demand. Each twist of the cycle brings
a new opportunity or threat. In the space of a few months a shipowner’s cashflow
can swell from a trickle to a flood, and the market value of his fleet may change by
millions of dollars. This is certainly a good way of catching the attention of shipping
company management, but what should they do?
The usual advice is to take advantage of the cycles to buy low and sell high.
This is fair enough, as far as it goes, but shipping is a game of skill and playing the
cycles depends on being able to recognize, or better still predict, the peaks and
troughs on the freight chart. Just being right is not enough. An investor may correctly
predict a market peak, but if the charterers take the same view there will be no
long-term contracts. Similarly, in market troughs owners may be ready to buy
cheap ships, but who is willing to sell for a loss? As Michael Hampton pointed out,
consensus is generally not a good signpost. The best opportunities go to those who
can judge when the other players in the market are wrong.
From an economic viewpoint each shipping cycle is unique. If we are to improve
our understanding of what is going on in the market, we must now develop a
systematic explanation of how the freight market cycles are generated. To do this
we will use the supply and demand model, a technique often used by economists
to analyse commodity markets. The term model is used here in just the same way
as when we talk about a model ship—it is a smaller version of the real thing,
leaving out those details that are not relevant to the present subject. The aim is to
explain the mechanisms which determine freight rates in a consistent way.
Key influences on supply and demand
The maritime economy is enormously complex, so the first task is to simplify the
model by singling out those factors that are most important. This is not to suggest
that detail should be ignored, but rather to accept that too much detail can hinder a
clear analysis. In the initial stages at least we must generalize. From the many
influences on the shipping market we can select ten as being particularly important,
five affecting the demand for sea transport and five affecting the supply. These are
summarized in Table 4.1.
As far as the demand for sea transport is concerned (the ‘demand function’), the
five variables are the world economy, seaborne commodity trades, average haul,
political events and transport costs. To explain the supply of shipping services (the
‘supply function’), we have identified the world fleet, fleet productivity, shipbuilding
deliveries, scrapping and the freight rates. The way in which these variables fit
together into a simple model of the shipping market is shown in Figure 4.1. This
model has three components, demand (module a), supply (module b) and the freight
market (module c) which links the two by regulating the cashflow from one sector
to another.

115
How does the model work? The mechanics are very simple. On the demand
side, the world economy, through the activity of various industries, generates the
goods which require sea transport. Developments in particular industrial sectors
may modify the general growth trend (e.g. a change in the oil price, which influences
oil demand), as may changes in the distance over which the cargo is transported,
giving a final demand for shipping services measured in ton miles. The use of ton
miles as a measure of demand is technically more correct than simply using the
deadweight of cargo ships required, since it avoids making a judgement about the
efficiency with which ships are used. That belongs more properly to the supply
side of the model.
On the supply side, in the short term, the merchant fleet represents the fixed
stock of shipping capacity. At a point in time only part of this fleet may be trading.
Some ships may be laid up, or used for storage. The fleet can be expanded by new
building and reduced by scrapping. The amount of transport this fleet provides
also depends on the efficiency with which ships are operated, in particular speed
and waiting time (see para below). For example a fleet of tankers steaming at 11
knots and returning from each cargo voyage in ballast carries less cargo in a year
than the same size fleet of bulk carriers steaming at 14 knots and carrying a backhaul
for all or part of its journey. This efficiency variable is generally referred to as fleet
productivity and is expressed in ton miles per dwt per annum. Finally, the policies
of shippers, banks and regulators all have an impact on how the supply side of the
market develops.
Dynamic links in the model
The fulcrum pointer in the centre of the diagram in Figure 4.1 represents the
balance of supply and demand. Any imbalance feeds through into the third part of
the model, the freight market, which links supply and demand. In effect the freight
rate mechanism is the ‘switchbox’ which controls the amount of money paid by
shippers to shipowners for the transport they supply. When ships are in short supply,
freight rates are bid up and cash flows into the bank accounts of shipowners.
Eventually the increased cashflow starts to affect the behaviour of both the shippers
and shipowners. This is the behavioural part of the model. The shipowners will
probably start ordering new ships, while the shippers look for ways to cut their
TABLE 4.1 Ten variables in the shipping market model
THE SHIPPING MARKET MODEL

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
116
FIGURE 4.1 The shipping market model
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

117
transport costs by delaying cargoes, switching to closer suppliers or using bigger
ships. When there are too many ships, rates are bid down and shipowners have to
draw on reserves to pay fixed costs such as repairs and interest on loans. As reserves
diminish some owners are forced to sell ships to raise cash. Prices of ships fall to a
level where shipbreakers offer the best price for the older ships, reducing supply.
Changes in freight rates may also trigger a change in the performance of the fleet,
through adjustments to speed and layup. This link between market balance and
freight rates is one of the most important economic relationships in the model and
it is controlled by shipowners who decide how to respond. Because of this
behaviourial element mathematical models can never be totally relied upon to
simulate the freight market.
This model gives shipping market cycles their characteristic pattern of irregular
peaks and troughs. Demand is volatile, quick to change and unpredictable; supply
is ponderous and slow to change; and the freight mechanism amplifies even small
inbalances at the margin. Thus the ‘tortoise’ of supply chases the ‘hare’ of demand
across the freight chart, but hardly ever catches him. In a market with these dynamic
we must expect ‘balance’, in the sense of steady earnings over several years, to be
quite rare. As we saw in Chapter 2, such periods have been few and far between
during the last century.
This is the market model which controls shipping investment. In the remainder
of this chapter we will examine the three sections of the model. Our main interest
is not in the value of the variables themselves—we discuss this extensively in later
parts of the book—but rather to answer the questions: ‘Why does each variable
change?’ ‘What are the relationships between them?’. The model is dynamic in
the sense that supply and demand are determined separately, but linked by freight
rates. In principle, supply will follow demand if decision-makers are successful in
judging what the future level of demand will be and take the necessary actions to
adjust the available supply.
4.2 The demand for sea transport
We have suggested that ship demand, measured in ton miles of cargo, is mercurial
and quick to change, sometimes by as much as 10–20 per cent in a year. Ship
demand is also subject to longer-term changes of trend. Looking back over the last
two or three decades, there have been occasions when ship demand has grown
rapidly over a sustained period, as happened in the 1960s, and others when ship
demand stagnated and declined—notably, for example, the decade following the
1973 oil crisis.
The world economy
Undoubtedly, the most important single influence on ship demand is the world
economy. It came up repeatedly in our discussion of shipping cycles in Chapter 2.
Fifty years ago, in his review of the tramp market, Isserlis1 commented on the
similar timing of fluctuations in freight rates and cycles in the world economy.
THE DEMAND FOR SEA TRANSPORT

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
118
That there should be a close relationship is only to be expected, since the world
economy generates most of the demand for sea transport, through either the import
of raw materials for manufacturing industry, or the trade in manufactured products.
It follows that judging trends in the shipping market requires up-to-date knowledge
of developments in the world economy. The relationship between sea trade and
world industry is not, however, simple or direct. There are three different aspects
of the world economy that may bring about change in the demand for sea transport,
the business cycle, the ‘trade elasticity’ and the trade development cycle.
The business cycle lays the foundation for freight cycles. Fluctuations in the
rate of economic growth work through into seaborne trade, creating a cyclical
pattern of demand for ships. The recent history of these trade cycles is evident
from Figure 4.2 which shows the close relationship between the growth rate of sea
trade and industrial production over the thirty years 1963–95. Invariably the cycles
in the OECD economy were mirrored by cycles in sea trade. Note in particular the
two deep recessions in sea trade in 1975 and 1981–83 which coincided with
recessions in the world economy. Since world industrial production creates most
of the demand for commodities traded by sea, this is hardly surprising. Clearly the
business cycle is of major importance to anyone analysing the demand side of the
shipping market model.
Nowadays most economists accept that these economic cycles arise from a
combination of external and internal factors. The external factors include events
such as wars or sudden changes in commodity prices such as crude oil, which
cause a sudden change in demand. Internal factors refer to the dynamic structure
of the world economy itself, which, it is argued, leads naturally to a cyclical rather
than a linear growth path. Five of the more commonly quoted causes of business
cycles are:
•
The multiplier and accelerator. The main internal mechanism which creates
cycles is the interplay between consumption and investment. Income (GNP)
may be spent on investment goods or consumption goods. An increase in
FIGURE 4.2 Industrial cycles and sea trade
Source: OECD and Fearnleys Annual Review

119
investment (e.g. road building) creates new consumer demand from the workers
hired. They spend their wages, creating even more demand (the investment
multiplier). As the extra consumer expenditure trickles through the economy,
growth picks up (the income accelerator), generating demand for even more
investment goods. Eventually labour and capital become fully utilized and the
economy over-heats. Expansion is sharply halted, throwing the whole process
into reverse. Investment orders fall off, jobs are lost and the multiplier and
accelerator go into reverse. This creates a basic instability in the economic
‘machine’.2
•
Time-lags. The delays between economic decisions and their implementation
can make cyclical fluctuations more extreme. The shipping market provides
an excellent example. During a shipping market boom, shipowners order ships
that are not delivered until the market has gone into recession, when the arrival
of the new ships at a time when there is already a surplus further discourages
new ordering just at the time when shipbuilders are running out of work. The
result of these time-lags is to make booms and recessions more extreme and
cyclical.
•
Stockbuilding has the opposite short-term effect. It produces sudden bursts of
demand as industries adjust their stocks during the business cycle. The typical
stock cycle, if such a thing exists, goes something like this. During recessions
financially hard pressed manufacturers run down stocks, intensifying the
downturn in demand for sea transport. When the economy recovers, there is a
sudden rush to rebuild stocks, leading to a sudden burst of demand which
takes the shipping industry by surprise. Fear of supply shortages or rising
commodity prices during the recovery may encourage high stock levels,
reinforcing the process. On several occasions shipping booms have been driven
by short-term stockbuilding by industry in anticipation of future shortages or
price rises. Examples are the Korean War in 1952–3, the dry cargo boom of
1974–5, and the mini tanker booms in 1979 and summer 1986, both of which
were caused by temporary stockbuilding by the world oil industry.
•
Some economists argue that cycles are intensified by mass psychology.
Professor Pigou put forward the theory of ‘non-compensated errors.3 If people
act independently, their errors cancel out, but if they act in an imitative manner
a particular trend will build up to a level where they can affect the whole
economic system. Thus periods of optimism or pessimism become self-fulfilling
through the medium of stock exchanges, financial booms and the behaviour of
investors.
•
Random shocks which upset the stability of the economic system may contribute
to the cyclical process. Weather changes, wars, new resources, commodity
price changes, are all candidates. These differ from cycles because they are
unique, often precipitated by some particular event, and their impact on the
shipping market is often very severe. One of the most prominent examples
was the 1930s depression, which followed the Wall Street crash of 1929. More
recently examples, the effects of which are clearly visbible in Figure 4.2 are
the two oil price shocks which happened in 1973 and 1979. On both occasions,
industrial output and seaborne trade suddenly declined, setting off a shipping
THE DEMAND FOR SEA TRANSPORT

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
120
depression. Some economists think the whole cyclical process can be explained
by a stream of random shocks which make the economy oscillate at its ‘resonant
frequency’.
To help in predicting business cycles, statisticians have developed ‘leading
indicators’ which provide advance warning of turning points in the economy. For
example, the OECD publishes an index based on orders, stocks, the amount of
overtime worked and the number of workers laid off, in addition to financial statistics
such as money supply, company profits and stock market prices. It is suggested
that the turning point in the lead index will anticipate a similar turning point in the
industrial production index by about six months. To the analyst of short-term market
trends such information is useful, though few believe that business cycles are reliably
predictable. Two quotations serve to illustrate the point:
No two business cycles are quite the same; yet they have much in common.
They are not identical twins, but they are recognisable as belonging to the same
family. No exact formula, such as might apply to the motions of the moon or of
a simple pendulum, can be used to predict the timing of future (or past) business
cycles. Rather, in their rough appearance and irregularities, they more closely
resemble the fluctuations of disease epidemics, the vagaries of the weather, or
variations in a child’s temperature.4
A remark that can perhaps be made about industrial cycles in general is certainly
applicable to the shipping industry:
•
it is certain that these cycles exist;
•
their periodicity—the interval from peak to peak—is variable; and their
amplitude is variable;
•
the position of the peak or of the trough of a cycle in progress is not
predictable.
An ad hoc explanation can usually be found for each period of prosperity and
for each phase of the cycle if sufficient knowledge is available of the conditions
at the time .. but it is impossible to predict the occurrence of the successive
phases of a cycle which is in progress, and still more so in the case of a cycle
which has not yet commenced.5
In conclusion, the ‘business cycle’ in world industry is the most important cause of
shortterm fluctuations in seaborne trade and ship demand. However business cycles,
like the shipping cycles to which they contribute, do not follow in an orderly
progression. We must take many other factors into account before drawing such a
conclusion.
The trade elasticity of the world economy
We now turn to the long-term relationship between seaborne trade and the world
economy. Over a period of years does sea trade grow faster, slower, or at the same

121
rate as industrial output? Economists use the concept of ‘elasticity’ to describe this
relationship. The trade elasticity is the percentage growth of sea trade divided by
the percentage growth in industrial production. For most of the last 30 years the
trade elasticity has been positive, averaging 1.4. In other words, sea trade grew 40
per cent faster than world industry. However, if we study the year-by-year pattern
in Figure 4.3, we detect a change, starting in about 1975. Until the early 1970s, the
elasticity was fairly steady at about 1.6, but during the next period 1976–90 the
average fell to 1.4, and in the early 1990s it became highly volatile.6 It is important
to be aware that such changes are possible. There are two reasons why, over long
periods, the trade elasticity of individual regions will probably change.
The first is that balance of demand to available local resources of food and raw
materials is likely to change over time. This happens when domestic raw materials
are depleted, forcing users to turn to foreign suppliers—for example iron ore for
the European steel industry during the 1960s and crude oil for the USA market
during the 1970s and 1980s. Or the cause may be the superior quality of foreign
supplies, and the availability of cheap sea transport. Secondly, industrial
development brings changes in demand for bulk commodities such as iron ore,
which make up a large part of seaborne trade. As industrial economies mature,
economic activity tends to become less resource intensive, and the emphasis
switches from construction and stockbuilding of durables such as motor cars to
services such as medical care and recreation, with the result that there is a lower
requirement for imported raw materials.7 This contributed to the slower import
growth of Europe and Japan during the 1970s and 1980s.
FIGURE 4.3 Sea trade elasticity
Source: Calculated from the data contained in Figure 4.2
THE DEMAND FOR SEA TRANSPORT

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
122
Another reason is that the mix of countries generating industrial growth may
change—new countries emerge or others decline in importance. For example, the
industrial growth of Japan in the 1960s had an impact upon sea trade that greatly
exceeded its importance as an industrial nation Japanese imports generated 54 per
cent of the growth of the world deep sea seaborne dry cargo trade between 1965
and 1972.8 An even more extreme pattern was seen in the early 1990s, as South
Korea and other Asian countries moved along the industrial path, producing the
very high trade elasticities. This accounts for the very high trade elasticity in 1991–
3. As the world economy grows and develops, the value of the trade elasticity will
change.
Seaborne commodity trades
To find out more about the relationship between sea trade and the industrial economy
we turn to the second demand variable, the seaborne commodity trades. The
discussion falls into two parts, short-term and long-term.
An important cause of short term volatility is the seasonality of some trades.
Many agricultural commodities are subject to seasonal variations caused by harvests,
notably grain, sugar and citrus fruits. Grain exports from the US Gulf reach a
trough in the summer then build up in September as the crop is harvested. Trade
may increase by as much as 50 per cent between September and the end of the
year. In the oil business there is also a cycle that reflects the seasonal fluctuation in
energy consumption in the northern hemisphere, with the result that more oil is
shipped during the autumn and early winter than during the spring and summer.
Seasonality has a disproportionate effect on the spot market. Transport of seasonal
agricultural commodities is difficult to plan, so shippers of these commodities rely
heavily on the spot charter market to meet their tonnage requirements. As a result,
fluctuations in the grain market have more influence on the charter market than
some much larger trades such as iron ore where tonnage requirements are largely
met through long-term contracts. Some agricultural produce, such as fruit, meat
and dairy produce, require refrigeration. For this trade, special ‘reefer’ ships and
reefer containers are required.
Long-term trends in commodity trade are best identified by studying the
economic characteristics of the industries which produce and consume the traded
commodities. This is a topic we will examine in chapter 7. Although every business
is different, there are four types of change to look out for; changes in the demand
for that particular commodity (or the product into which it is manufactured); changes
in the source from which supplies of the commodity are obtained; changes due to
a relocation of processing plant which changes the trade pattern; and finally changes
in the shipper’s transport policy.
A classic example of changes in demand is the crude oil trade, which Figure 4.4
shows is the largest individual commodity traded by sea. During the 1960s, crude
oil demand grew two or three times as fast as the general rate of economic growth
because oil was cheap and the economies of Western Europe and Japan switched
from coal to oil as their primary energy source. Imported oil replaced domestic

123
coal, and the trade elasticity was very high. However, with the increase in oil
prices during the 1970s, this trend was reversed and the demand for crude oil first
stagnated and then declined. Coal regained some of its original market share and
the oil trade elasticity fell.
The same trade illustrates the importance of changes in supply sources. In the
1960s the main source of crude oil was the Middle East. However in the 1970s
new oil reserves near to the market, such as the North Sea and Alaska, came on
stream, reducing the need for deep sea imports. These developments had a major
impact upon the volume of seaborne trade, as can be seen from Figure 4.4 which
shows how the growth trend of crude oil changed in 1973 and again in 1980.
Depletion of local resources provides another example of how changing supply
sources affects seaborne trade. An example is provided by European iron ore
imports. During the first century after the industrial revolution, Western Europe
FIGURE 4.4 Major seaborne trades by commodity 1963–96
Source: Fearnleys, Annual Review
relied on iron ore produced locally in Europe and Scandinavia. However, with the
expansion of the steel industry in the 1960s it became increasingly difficult to
meet demand from this source and, as new high-grade iron ore mines were developed
in Brazil, Australia and West Africa, domestic supplies were progressively replaced
by imports. As a result of the rundown of local supplies, iron ore imports into
Western Europe during the 1960s grew faster than steel production, boosting the
demand for sea transport.
A third factor to consider is that, for industrial raw materials, relocation of
processing can have a direct effect on the volume of cargo shipped by sea and the
type of ship required. Take, for example, the aluminium industry. The raw material
of aluminium production is bauxite. It takes about 3 tons of bauxite to produce 1
ton of alumina and 2 tons of alumina to produce 1 ton of aluminium. Consequently
a commercial decision to refine bauxite to alumina before shipment reduces the
THE DEMAND FOR SEA TRANSPORT

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
124
volume of cargo shipped by sea by two-thirds. Alumina has a higher value and is
used in smaller quantities than bauxite so the transport requirement switches from
larger vessels suitable for the bauxite trade to smaller bulk carriers suitable for
alumina.
Sometimes processing does not actually reduce the volume of cargo but changes
the shipping requirement. In the early days of the oil trade, crude oil was refined at
source and transported as oil products in products carriers. In the early 1950s, the
oil companies moved towards the transport of crude oil, locating their refineries at
the market. This led to the construction of very large crude carriers (VLCCs).
Similarly, forest products were originally shipped as logs, but with developing
sophistication in the industry there has been a trend towards processing logs into
sawn lumber, woodchips, panels or wood pulp prior to shipment. While this did
not have a major impact upon the volume of cargo, it resulted in the construction
of special forest product carriers.
Finally we come to the fourth long-term item, shipper’s transport policy. This is
well illustrated by the oil industry. Until the 1970s the major oil companies planned
and controlled the sea transport of oil. The oil companies planned their tonnage
requirements, building ships or signing long time charters with shipowners. The
oil trade grew regularly and any minor errors in their planning would quickly be
corrected. In this highly structured environment the role of the spot market was
relegated to less than 10 per cent of total transport requirements. It was there to
cover seasonal fluctuations, minor misjudgements in the speed of trade growth
and the occasional mishap such as the closure of the Suez Canal.
After the 1973 oil crisis the oil trade became more volatile and oil company policy
changed. Faced with uncertainty over trade volume, the oil shippers relied more
heavily on the spot market for their transport requirements. By the 1990s the spot
market’s share of oil shipments had increased from 10 per cent to almost 50 per
cent. This trend was reinforced by a change in the commercial structure of the oil
business. After 1973 the control of oil transport changed. Producers,
oil companies in industrializing areas like South Korea and oil traders, who had less
incentive to become directly involved in oil transport, started to play a bigger part.
The commodity developments outlined above are not of major significance when
considering short-term cycles in ship demand, since changes of this type do not
take place overnight. They are, however, of considerable importance when judging
the medium-term growth of demand and the employment prospects for particular
ship types. As a result, any thorough medium-term analysis of the demand for sea
transport needs to consider carefully the development of the commodity trades.
Further discussion of the major commodity trades can be found in Chapter 6.
Average haul and ton miles
The demand for sea transport depends upon the distance over which the cargo is
shipped. A ton of oil transported from the Middle East to Western Europe via the
Cape generates two or three times as much demand for sea transport as the same
tonnage of oil shipped from Libya to Marseilles. This distance effect is generally
referred to as the ‘average haul’ of the trade. To take account of average haul, it is

125
usual to measure sea transport demand in terms of ‘ton miles’, which can be
defined as the tonnage of cargo shipped, multiplied by the average distance over
which it is transported.
The effect on ship demand of changing the average haul has been dramatically
illustrated several times in recent years by the closure of the Suez Canal, which
increased the average distance by sea from the Arabian Gulf to Europe from 6,000
miles to 11,000 miles. As a result of the sudden increase in ship demand there was
a freight market boom on each occasion. Another example was the closure of the
Dortyol pipeline from Iraq to Turkey when Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990. As a
result 1.5 million barrels per day of oil which had previously been shipped from
the East Mediterranean had to be shipped from the Arabian Gulf.
In most trades we find that the average haul has changed over the last few decades.
Figure 4.5 shows the average haul of crude oil, oil products, iron ore, coal and
grain during the period 1963–94. In the crude oil trade, the average haul jumped
from 4,500 miles in 1963 to over 7,000 miles a decade later, fell precipitately back
to 4,500 in 1985 and then increased to 5,400 miles. The products trade was stable
at about 3,800 miles until the early 1980s when long haul exports from Middle
East refineries pushed the average up to 5,000 miles. There was also rapid growth
in the average haul in the iron ore and coal trades, both of which increased steadily
from about 3,000 miles in 1963 to over 5,000 by the early 1980s.
Analysing changes in the average haul of a commodity trade can be extremely
complex, requiring information in the form of detailed trade matrices, but very
often the key issue is simply the balance between long haul and short haul suppliers.
For example, in the oil trade some oil producers are located close to the major
consuming markets: Libya, North Africa, the North Sea, Mexico, Venezuela and
FIGURE 4.5 Average haul of commodity trades 1963–96
Source: Fearnleys, Work Bulk Trades
THE DEMAND FOR SEA TRANSPORT

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
126
Indonesia are all located close to their principal markets in Western Europe, Japan
and the United States. Oil not obtained from these sources is, of necessity, shipped
from the Middle East, which is about 11,000 miles from Western Europe and the
USA and about 6,500 miles from Japan. Consequently, the average haul in the oil
trade depends upon the balance of output from these two groups of suppliers. The
rapidly increasing haul during the 1960s can be explained by the growing share of
the Middle East in total oil exports, while the declining haul during the mid-1970s
reflected the cut-back in Middle East supplies as new short haul sources such as
Alaska, North Sea and Mexico came on stream against a background of a declining
oil trade.
A similar pattern can be found in the iron ore, and bauxite trades. In the early
1960s the major importers drew their supplies from local sources—Scandinavia in
the case of iron ore and the Caribbean for bauxite. As the demand for imports
increased, more distant supplies became available, the cost being offset to a large
extent by the economies of scale obtainable from the use of large bulk carriers.
Thus the European and Japanese iron ore markets came to be supplied principally
from long haul sources in Brazil and Australia and the bauxite market from Australia
and West Africa.
Political disturbances and ship demand
No discussion of sea transport demand would be complete without reference to the
impact of politics. The singular feature of political developments as far as the
shipping market is concerned is that when they occur they are inclined to bring
about a sudden and unexpected change in demand. The term ‘political event’ is
used here to refer to such occurrences as a localized war, a revolution, the political
nationalization of foreign assets or even strikes.
Events of this type do not necessarily impact directly on ship demand; it is
generally their indirect consequences that are significant. The various wars between
Israel and Egypt had important repercussions, owing to the proximity of the Suez
Canal and its strategic importance as a shipping route between the Mediterranean
and the Indian Ocean. The more protracted and extensive war between Iran and
Iraq had no such effect, and if anything probably reduced the demand for sea
transport by encouraging oil importers to obtain their supplies from other sources,
most of which were closer to the market. The impact of the Korean war in the early
1950s was felt through its effect on commodity stockpiling, while the invasion of
Kuwait by Iraq in 1990 created a short tanker boom because speculators started to
use tankers for oil storage.
Having made these reservations, the regularity with which political events have,
by one means or another, turned the shipping market on its head is quite striking.
Leaving aside the First and Second World Wars, since 1945 there have been at
least seven political incidents that have had a significant influence on ship demand:
•
The Korean War, which started in early 1950. Although cargo associated directly
with the war was mainly transported by ships of the US reserve fleet, political
uncertainty sparked off a stockbuilding boom in Western countries;

127
•
The Suez crisis and the nationalization of the Suez Canal by the Egyptian
government in July 1956. Oil tankers trading to Europe were diverted round
the Cape and this created a sudden increase in ship demand;
•
The Six Day War between Israel and Egypt in May 1967 resulted in the closure
of the Canal. European oil imports were again diverted round the Cape;
•
The closure of the Tap Line oil pipeline between Saudi Arabia and the
Mediterranean in 1970 redirected crude oil previously shipped through the
pipeline around the Cape;
•
The nationalization of Libyan oil assets in August 1973 resulted in the
oil companies turning to the more distant Middle East producers for oil
supplies;
•
The Yom Kippur War in October 1973 and the OPEC production cut-back
triggered the collapse of the tanker market. The associated oil price rise had an
effect on the world economy and the shipping market that was to last more
than a decade.
•
The 1979 Iran Revolution and the temporary cessation of Iranian oil exports
precipitated a major increase in the price of crude oil, with significant
repercussions for the world economy and the shipping market.
•
The 1990/1 Gulf War which resulted in the closure of the Dortyol pipeline and
a phase of short term oil stockbuilding. Both increased tanker demand.
Other political events have had a more localized effect on the shipping market. For
example, the Falklands War in 1982 resulted in the British government chartering
ships from UK owners. In the early 1960s, the Cuban crisis resulted in Cuban
sugar exports being diverted to the USSR and China, while US importers obtained
their supplies from other sources, again causing some disruption of the shipping
market. The Iran-Iraq War of 1982 had localized effects on the tanker market.
On this evidence it is clear that any balanced view of the development of the
shipping market must take account of potentially important facts of a political
nature. Information of this type is often outside the experience of market analysts,
with the result that few market forecasts take very much account of such
factors. However, in this case, the facts speak for themselves in emphasizing the
importance of this topic as a regular contributor to the mercurial behaviour of ship
demand.
Transport costs and the long run demand function
Finally we come to the cost of sea transport. Many of the developments in sea
trade of the type discussed in the previous section depend on the economics of the
shipping operation. Raw materials will only be transported from distant sources if
the cost of the shipping operation can be reduced to an acceptable level or some
major benefit is obtained in quality of product. This makes transport costs a
significant factor for industry—according to an EEC study, in the early 1980s
transport costs accounted for 20 per cent of the cost of dry bulk cargo delivered to
countries within the Community.9
THE DEMAND FOR SEA TRANSPORT

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
128
Over the last century, improved efficiency, bigger ships and more effective
organization of the shipping operation have brought about a steady reduction in
transport costs and higher quality of service. In fact the cost of shipping a ton of
coal from the Atlantic to the Pacific hardly changed between 1950 and 1994 (Figure
4.6). This was achieved by using bigger ships. In 1950 the coal would have travelled
in a 20,000 dwt vessel at a cost of $10–15 per ton. Forty years later a 150,000 dwt
bulker would be used, still at $10–15 per ton. There can be little doubt that this has
contributed materially to the growth of international trade. Developing this point,
Kindleberger comments: ‘what the railway did for the development of national
markets in England and France the development of cheap ocean shipping has done
for world trade. New channels of trade have been opened up, new links forged.’10
Although transport costs may not appear to be such a dramatic influence upon
seaborne trade as the world economy, their long-term effect on trade development
should not be underrated.
4.3 The supply of sea transport
In the introduction to this chapter we characterized the supply of shipping services
as being slow and ponderous in its response to changes in demand. Merchant ships
take several years to build and this in itself introduces a time-lag into the response
to an upsurge in demand. Once built, the ships have a physical life of 15–30 years,
so responding to a fall in demand is a lengthy business, particularly when there is
a large surplus to be removed. Our aim in this section is to explain how this
adjustment process is controlled.
FIGURE 4.6 Coal transport costs Hampton Roads/Japan 1950–96
Source: Fearnleys, various brokers’ reports

129
The decision-makers who control supply
We start with the decision-makers. The supply of ships controlled, or influenced,
by four groups of decision-makers, shipowners, shippers/charterers, the bankers
who finance shipping and the various regulatory authorities who make rules for
safety. Shipowners are the primary decision-makers, ordering new ships, scrapping
old ones and deciding when to lay up tonnage. Shippers may become shipowners
themselves or influence shipowners by issuing time charters. Bank lending
influences investment and it is often banks who exert the financial pressure that
leads to scrapping in a weak market. Regulators affect supply through safety or
environmental legislation which affects the transport capacity of the fleet. For
example, IMO Regulation 13G introduced in 1992 requires large tankers to fit a
double hull at 30 years of age, a modification no shipowner is likely to comply
with on economic grounds.11
At this point, a warning is needed. Because the supply of shipping capacity is
controlled by this small group of decision-makers, the supply side relationships in
the shipping model are behavioural. If we draw an analogy with a poker game,
there are many ways of playing a particular hand. The player may be cautious, or
he may decide to bluff. All his opponent can do is make the best judgement he can
based on an assessment of character and how he played previous hands. Exactly
the same problem faces the shipping analyst trying to judge the relationship between,
for example, freight rates and newbuilding orders. The fact that high freight rates
have stimulated orders in the past is no guarantee that the relationship will hold in
future. Market behaviour cannot be explained in purely economic terms. In 1973,
when freight rates were very high, shipowners ordered more tankers than could
possibly have been required to meet even the most optimistic forecast of oil trade
growth. Similarly, in 1982–3 when freight rates were low, there was an ordering
boom for bulk carriers. It is in situations like this that clear sighted analysts have
something to say.
The merchant fleet
The starting point for a discussion of the supply of sea transport is the merchant
fleet. The development of the fleet over the three decades 1963 to 1993 is shown in
Figure 4.7. This was a period of great change, comprising periods of rapid growth,
stagnation, decline and more gradual growth.
In the long run scrapping and deliveries determine the rate of fleet growth.
Since the average economic life of a ship is about 25 years, only a small proportion
of the fleet is scrapped each year, so the pace of adjustment to changes in the
market is measured in years not months. A key feature of the shipping market
model is the mechanism by which supply adjusts when ship demand does not turn
out as expected. Looking back over the last three decades we find examples of the
merchant fleet in both expansion and contraction phases. It can be seen in Figure
4.7 that the adjustment process involved changes in the type of ship within the
fleet.
THE SUPPLY OF SEA TRANSPORT

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
130
Starting in the early 1960s, the oil tanker fleet went through a cycle of growth
and contraction that took over 20 years to achieve. Between 1962 and 1974 the
demand for seaborne oil transport measured in ton miles almost quadrupled and,
despite the expansion of shipyard capacity, by the late 1960s supply could not
keep up with demand (compare sea trade growth with fleet growth in Figure 4.7).
As a result, there was an acute shortage of tanker capacity; in the early 1970s
tankers were in such short supply that ships were sold ‘off the stocks’ for twice
their original contract price—in the peak freight market of 1973 the profits on a
few voyages were sufficient to pay off the investment in the ship. This led to record
orders for new ships.
In the mid-1970s the whole process was thrown into reverse. Over the next
decade tanker demand fell by 60 per cent and the tanker market was confronted
with the problem of bringing supply and demand into balance. It took about 10
years for supply to adjust to such a major change in demand. The fleet statistics in
Figure 4.7 show what happened. After the collapse of the trade in 1975, the fleet
continued to grow as the orders placed in 1973 were delivered, reaching a peak of
332 m.dwt in 1977. Scrapping did not start until the owners of the vessels became
convinced that there was no future for them. This position was reached in the early
1980s when the second-hand price of VLCCs, some of which had cost $50–60
million to build in the mid-1970s, fell to $3 million. There was so little demand
that sometimes ships put to auction did not attract a bid. The only buyers were
shipbreakers. As scrap sales increased the fleet started to decline, reaching a trough
in 1985. When the oil trade recovered in the late 1980s, supply and demand grew
closer together, and freight rates increased. The whole cycle took about 14 years.
The combined carrier fleet links the wet and dry markets. Combination tonnage
was pioneering in the early 1950s to obtain high cargo performance by carrying oil
FIGURE 4.7 World fleet by ship type 1963–96
Source: Fearnleys, Annual Review

131
in one direction with a return load of dry cargo. However, real growth of the fleet
was sparked off by the closure of the Suez Canal in 1967, when combined carrier
owners, who had previously traded mainly in dry cargo, were able to take advantage
of the very favourable oil freight market. Many orders were placed in the next few
years and the fleet reached a peak of 48.7 m.dwt in 1978 and then declined to
below 20 m.dwt in the 1990s. Most of the fleet is in the 80,000–200,000 dwt size
group, which limits its activities in dry bulk to the larger bulk cargoes such as iron
ore, or part cargoes of grain and coal.
Dry bulk carriers started to appear in the shipping market in the late 1950s and
between 1963 and 1996 the bulk fleet grew from 17 m.dwt to 237 m.dwt. The use
of large bulk carriers played an integral part in the growth of major deep sea bulk
trades such as iron ore and coal, because economies of scale allowed these raw
materials to be imported at very low cost. During the same period, there was a
progressive switch of cargoes such as grain, sugar, minor ores, and steel products,
which had previously been carried in ’tweendeckers or as bottom cargo in liners,
into dry bulk carriers. The market widening meant that the market share of bulk
tonnage grew steadily during the 1960s and 1970s at the expense of the multi-deck
fleet, with a progressive upward movement in ship size and none of the chronic
overcapacity problems encountered in the oil market.
In recent years the major change in the deep sea liner trades was the replacement
of traditional liners by cellular container ships. The first containership went into
service in 1966. By 1995 the fleet had grown to 43.4 m.dwt, averaging 13 per cent
per annum growth during the previous 5 years (Table 4.2). In contrast, the general
cargo fleet of 81.9 m.dwt grew at only 2 per cent per annum. This fleet is composed
of multi-deck general cargo ships, purpose-built deep sea liners, and ’tweendeckers.
The size of the ’tweendecker fleet is not known precisely, but it is probably about
10–15 million grt—there are, 4 million grt of SD14s and Freedoms. Finally, there
are specialist fleets of chemical and specialist tankers (19.9 m dwt), gas tankers
(22 million cubic meters), ro-ros and refrigerated vessels.
In practice, the different ship types discussed above do not operate in separate
and self-contained markets. Although there is much specialization in the shipping
TABLE 4.2 The world fleet (m.dwt)
Source: Lloyd’s Register of Shipping Statistical Tables 1996
THE SUPPLY OF SEA TRANSPORT

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
132
market, there is also a high degree of substitution between ship types. In a volatile
market, flexibility is desirable and some ships, such as ‘tweendeckers and combined
carriers, are built with the objective of being flexible. This leads us to the important
Principle of Lateral Mobility (which is discussed further in Chapter 11, section
11.4): shipowners redeploy surplus vessels into more profitable applications in
other sectors of the market. An example of the way this works in practice is provided
by the following extract from a broker’s report:
Larger vessels of 40,000 dwt and above were particularly economical on the
long hauls, and charterers now quoted substantially reduced rates for such trades.
This pressed medium-sized bulk carriers of about 30,000 dwt into finding
employment in trades previously serviced by vessels of 10–20,000 dwt and in
the scrap trade from US to Japan units of 25–35,000 dwt were successfully
introduced…with tankers and large dry cargo vessels taking care of the main
part of the grain movements a new market was created for Liberty type vessels
as barges in India and Pakistan where ports cannot accommodate large vessels.12
Thus ships move freely from one market sector to another. As we have noted,
combined carriers are built for this purpose and were used very successfully in
1967 when the Suez Canal was closed, as the following quotation suggests:
The improvement in freights was mainly brought about by the many combined
carriers which switched to oil transportation as did the majority of tankers
employed in the grain trades. Heavy demand for large conventional bulk carriers
to replace the combined carriers caused a considerable number of this kind of
newbuilding in the 50–100,000 dwt class to find a very favourable market when
commissioned.13
Perhaps the most striking feature of the world merchant fleet during the last 30
years has been the rapid escalation of ship sizes, particularly in the bulk sector of
the fleet. In the tanker market there was a steady increase in the average size of
tankers until the early 1980s when the size structure stabilized. In bulk carriers
there was a similar upward movement in ship size, but the pattern was more evenly
spread between the different ship size groups with the fleets of ‘handy’ vessels
(20,000–40,000 dwt), Panamax (40,000–80,000 dwt) and large bulk carriers over
80,000 dwt all expanding. Larger and more efficient ships have progressively pushed
their way into the market and depressed rates for smaller sizes. At the same time
investment for specialization, as in the case of car carriers, and chemical tankers
played an important part in the development of the fleet. These apparently conflicting
objectives emphasize the complexity of the investment decisions facing the modern
shipowner.
Fleet productivity
Although the fleet is fixed in size, the productivity with which the ships are used
adds an element of flexibility.14 Past productivity statistics in Figure 4.8 shows

133
how much the productivity of the various sections of the fleet has changed over the
past decade. For example, crude oil tankers reached a peak productivity of 44,000
ton miles per deadweight in 1972, but by 1985 this had fallen to 24,000 ton miles
per deadweight; in other words, productivity had halved. A few years later it had
increased by 40 per cent to 33,000 ton miles per deadweight. The productivity of
dry cargo ships was more stable at around 20,000–25,000 ton miles per deadweight.
The nature of these productivity changes becomes more apparent when we look
in detail at what merchant ships actually do. Carrying cargo is just one small part
of the story As an illustration Figure 4.9 shows what the ‘average’ VLCC was
doing during the year. Surprisingly, it spent only 137 days carrying cargo—little
more than one-third of its time. What happened to the rest? Ballast time accounted
for 111 days and cargo handling for 40 days. The remaining 21 per cent of the time
was spent in non-trading activities. This included incidents (i.e. accidents), repair,
lay-up, waiting, short-term storage and long-term storage. When we analyse these
activities more systematically, it becomes apparent that some are determined by
both the physical performance of the fleet, and market forces.
FIGURE 4.8 Performance of the tanker and dry cargo fleets 1963–95
Source: Fearnleys, Annual Review
The productivity (P) of a fleet of ships measured in ton miles per dwt depends
upon four main factors, speed, port time, deadweight utilization and loaded days at
sea (see chapter 5, section 5.4 for a more detailed discussion of productivity).
First, speed determines the time a vessel takes on a voyage. Tracking surveys
show that, owing to a combination of operational factors, even in good markets
ships generally operate at average speeds well below their design speed. For
example, in 1991 the fleet of tankers over 200,000 dwt had an average design
THE SUPPLY OF SEA TRANSPORT

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
134
speed of 15.1 knots, but the average operating speed between ports was 11.5
knots.15 The speed of the fleet will change with time. If new ships are delivered
with a lower design speed, this will progressively reduce the transport capacity of
the fleet. Similarly, as ships age, unless exceptionally well maintained, hull fouling
will gradually reduce the maximum operating speed.
Second, port time plays an important part in the productivity equation. The
physical performance of the ships and terminals sets the upper limit. For example,
the introduction of containerization dramatically reduced port time for liners.
Organization of the transport operation also plays a part. After the oil crisis in
1973 changes in the oil industry reduced the opportunities for maximizing the
efficiency of tanker operations by the transport planning departments of the major
oil companies. Congestion produces temporary reductions in performance. Middle
East port congestion absorbed large amounts of shipping in the mid-1970s, and in
1980 there was heavy congestion at Hampton Roads, USA, with queues of over
100 bulk carriers waiting to load coal. This congestion reduced the supply of ships
available for trading.
Third, deadweight utilization (DWU) refers to the cargo capacity lost owing to
bunkers, stores, etc. which prevent a full load from being carried. A rule of thumb
estimate of 95 per cent for bulk carriers and 96 per cent for tankers is derived from
surveys. During the recessions of the 1970s and 1980s there was an increasing
tendency for owners to carry part cargoes, reducing deadweight utilization to well
below these levels. For example, John I. Jacobs’ statistics estimate that at the end
of 1986 about 16.6 m.dwt of tanker capacity was lost owing to part cargoes.
Finally, a vessel’s time is divided between loaded days at sea and ‘unproductive’
days (in ballast, port, or off hire). A reduction in unproductive time allows an
increase in loaded days at sea, and one can interpret changes in this variable in
terms of changes in port time, etc.16 Vessels designed for cargo flexibility can
improve their loaded time at sea because they are able to switch cargoes for
backhauls. The fleet’s operating performance changes in response to market
conditions, as is clearly demonstrated by the changes in tanker productivity shown
in Figure 4.8. Faced with a depressed freight market, the first response of the
merchant fleet is generally to reduce its pace of operation. To save bunker costs,
owners reduce the operating speed and, since cargoes are less readily available,
waiting times increase. Eventually ships that are too expensive to operate are laid
up. Tankers are frequently used for oil storage, either in port or in offshore
installations. Bulk carriers may be used to store coal or grain. Some tankers in
storage are on contracts lasting only a few months, after which they will become
available for trading. Others used in offshore oil production may be employed on
long contracts, so for practical purposes they are no longer part of the trading fleet.
Shipbuilding production
The shipbuilding industry plays an active part in the fleet adjustment process
described in the previous paragraphs. In principle, the level of output should adjust
to changes in demand, and over long periods this does happen. Thus, in 1974,

135
shipbuilding output accounted for about 12 per cent of the merchant fleet, whereas
in 1996 it had fallen to 4.7 per cent. Adjustments in the level of shipbuilding output
on this scale do not take place quickly or easily. Shipbuilding is a long-cycle
business, and the time-lag between ordering and delivering a ship is between 1 and
4 years, depending on the size of orderbook held by the shipbuilders. Orders must
be placed on the basis of an estimate of future demand and in the past these estimates
have often proved to be wrong, most dramatically in the mid-1970s when deliveries
of VLCCs continued for several years after demand had gone into decline. In
addition, downward adjustments in shipbuilding supply may be seriously hampered
by political intervention to prevent job losses.
From the point of view of the shipping industry, the type of ship built is important
because peaks and troughs in the deliveries of specific ship types have an impact
on their market prospects. In recent years there have been major changes in the
product range of ships built by the merchant shipbuilding industry. These are
illustrated graphically in Figure 4.10.
Tanker production illustrates the extreme swings which can occur in shipping
investment. Tanker newbuilding dominated the period 1963–75, increasing from 5
m.dwt in 1963 to 45 m.dwt in 1975, when it accounted for 75 per cent of shipbuilding
output. The collapse of the tanker market after the 1973 oil crisis reversed this
trend and tanker output fell to a trough of 3.6 m.dwt in 1984, accounting for only
1 per cent of the tanker fleet. In the absence of VLCC orders, the tanker deliveries
during the period 1978–84 were principally products tankers or 80,000–120,000
dwt crude oil tankers. As the tanker fleet built in the 1970s needed to be replaced
FIGURE 4.9 VLCC operating performance: use of the ‘average’ VLCC 1991
Source: VLCC Quality Survey (1991), Clarkson Research Studies
THE SUPPLY OF SEA TRANSPORT

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
136
the trend was again reversed and by 1993 tanker production had increased to 17.3
m.dwt
Compared with oil tankers, the dry bulk carrier newbuilding market has been
comparatively stable since the mid-1960s. However, investment has been very
cyclical with deliveries fluctuating between 5 and 15 m.dwt per annum. A very
low output of 4 m.dwt in 1979 was followed by the ‘mini boom’ in the dry cargo
market during 1979–80. Heavy ordering resulted in peak deliveries of 14.7 m.dwt
in 1985, accounting for 59 per cent of total world shipbuilding output in deadweight
tonnage terms. In a very real sense bulk carriers took over the dominant role in the
shipbuilding market previously occupied by VLCCs, and by the mid-1980s were
facing the same problems of overproduction and chronic surplus. One consequence
of this heavy investment was a deep recession in the mid-1980s. Ordering stopped
and deliveries of bulk carriers fell to 3.2 m.dwt in 1988. By 1990 deliveries were
back up to 9.2 m.dwt, and so the cycles continued.
The remaining category of shipbuilding output comprises an enormous range
of merchant cargo and service vessels—ro-ros, container ships, conventional general
cargo vessels, fishing boats, ferries, cruise liners, tugs, etc. The total tonnage of
deliveries in 1996 was 7.3 m.dwt, accounting for 22 per cent of total output, and
the newbuilding trend in this sector has been comparatively stable over the last two
decades at about this level. Although these ship types account for only a fifth of the
total merchant shipbuilding output in deadweight terms, in terms of work content
they are much more important—for example, a deadweight ton of ferry tonnage
may contain four or five times as much work as a deadweight ton of tanker tonnage.
For this reason, the various ship types in this category are substantially more
important to the shipbuilding industry than might appear at first sight.
FIGURE 4.10 World shipbuilding output by type 1963–96
Source: Fearnley’s Annual Review

137
Scrapping and losses
The rate of growth of the merchant fleet depends on the balance between deliveries
of new ships and deletions from the fleet in the form of ships scrapped or lost at
sea. This balance changed radically during the late 1970s, as can be seen from
Figure 4.11. In 1973, only about 5 m.dwt of vessels were scrapped, compared with
deliveries of over 50 m.dwt, with the result that the fleet grew rapidly. By 1982,
scrapping had overtaken deliveries for the first time since the Second World War,
accounting for 30 m.dwt compared with 26 m.dwt of deliveries. Thus scrapping,
which appeared to be of little significance in 1973, was of major importance by the
early 1980s.
FIGURE 4.11 World ship scrapping by type 1963–96
Source: Fearnleys, Annual Review
Whilst it is clear that scrapping has a significant part to play in removing ships
from the market, explaining or predicting the age at which a ship will actually be
scrapped is an extremely complex subject, and one that causes considerable
difficulties in judging the development of shipping capacity. The reason is that
scrapping depends on the balance of a number of factors that can interact in many
different ways. The main ones are age, technical obsolescence, scrap prices, current
earnings and market expectations.
Age is the primary factor determining the tonnage of vessels scrapped. Ships
deteriorate as they grow older and the cost of routine repairs and maintenance
increases; thus the owners of elderly vessels face the combination of heavier costs
and more time off hire for planned and unplanned maintenance. Because physical
deterioration is a gradual process, there is no specific age at which a ship is scrapped;
a look through Lloyd’s Demolition Register generally reveals a few examples of
THE SUPPLY OF SEA TRANSPORT

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
138
vessels scrapped with an age of over 60 or 70 years, or at the other extreme tankers
sold for demolition at as little as 10 years. In 1996 when 217 bulk vessels were
scrapped the average scrapping age was 25 years for both tankers and dry cargo
vessels. In each case there was a wide spread.
Technical obsolescence may reduce the age at which a particular type of vessel
is scrapped because it is superseded by a more efficient ship type. For example, the
high scrapping rate of multi-deckers in the late 1960s is attributable to these vessels
being made obsolete by containerization. Obsolescence also extends to the ship’s
machinery and gear—tankers fitted with inefficient steam turbines were among
the first to go to the scrapyard when prices rose in the 1970s.
The decision to scrap is also influenced by the scrap prices. Scrap ships are sold
to shipbreakers, who demolish them and sell the scrap to the steel industry. Scrap
prices fluctuate widely, depending upon the state of supply and demand in the
steel industry and the availability of scrap metal from sources such as shipbreaking
or the demolition of vehicles, which form the largest sources of supply. A period of
extensive ship scrapping may even depress prices of scrap metal—a process that is
accentuated by the fact that shipping surpluses often occur simultaneously with
trade cycle downswings in the industrialized regions when demand for steel is also
depressed.
Most importantly, the scrapping of a ship is a business decision and depends on
the owner’s expectations of the future operating profitability of the vessel and his
financial position. If, during a recession, he believes that there is some chance of a
freight market boom in the reasonably near future, he is unlikely to sell unprofitable
ships for scrap because the possible earnings during a freight market boom are so
great that they may justify incurring a small operating loss for a period of years up
to that date. Naturally the oldest ships will be forced out by the cost of repairs but,
where vessels are still serviceable, extensive scrapping to remove a surplus capacity
is only likely to occur when the shipping community as a whole believes that there
is no prospect of profitable employment for the older vessels in the foreseeable
future, or when companies need the cash so urgently that they are forced into
‘distress’ sales to shipbreakers. It follows that scrapping will occur only when the
industry’s reserves of cash and optimism have been run down.
Freight rates
Finally the supply of sea transport is influenced by freight rates. This is the ultimate
regulator which the market uses to motivate decision-makers to adjust capacity in
the short term, and to find ways of reducing their costs in the long-term. In the
shipping industry there are two main pricing regimes, the freight market and the
liner market. Liner shipping provides transport for small quantities of cargo for
many customers and is a essentially a retail shipping business.17 The liner company
is a common carrier, accepting cargo from any customer at prices set out in the rate
book. That is not to suggest that the business is not competitive. On the contrary, as
we will see in chapter 10, it has spent most of its 125-year history in deep
competition. In contrast bulk shipping is a wholesale operation. It sells its services

139
in large quantities, by contract to a much smaller number of industrial customers at
individually negotiated prices. In both cases the pricing system is central to the
supply of transport. In the short run supply responds to prices as ships change their
operation speed and move to and from layup, while liner operators adjust their
services. In the longer term freight rates contribute to the investment decisions
which result in scrapping and ordering of ships. How this works in the bulk market
is the subject of the next section. Liner pricing, which has a different economic
structure, is discussed in chapter 10.
4.4. The freight rate mechanism
The third part of the shipping market model, labelled C in Figure 4.1, is the
freight market. This is the adjustment mechanism linking supply and demand. The
way it operates is simple enough. Shipowners and shippers negotiate to establish a
freight rate which reflects the balance of ships and cargoes available in the market.
If there are too many ships the freight rate is low while if there are too few ships
it will be high. Once this freight rate is established, shippers and shipowners
adjust to it and eventually this brings supply and demand into balance. The three
key economic concepts we will use to analyse this process more formally are the
supply function, the demand function and the equilibrium price.18
The supply and demand functions
The supply function for an individual ship, shown in Figure 4.12a is a hockey stick
shaped curve describing the amount of transport the owner provides at each level
of freight rates. The ship in this example is a 280,000 dwt VLCC. When the freight
rate falls below $155 per mtm the owner puts it into layup, offering no transport.
As freight rates rise past $155 per mtm he breaks layup but, to save fuel, steams at
the lowest viable speed of 11 knots per hour. If he trades loaded with cargo at this
speed for 137 days per annum (see Figure 4.9), he will supply 10.1 btm of transport
in a year (i.e. 11*24*137*280,000). At higher freight rates he speeds up until at
about $220 per mtm the ship is at full speed of 15 knots and supplying 13.8 btm of
sea transport per year (a lot of transport for just one ship!). Thus by increasing
freight rates the market has obtained an extra 38 per cent supply. Evidence of this
process at work can be seen in Figure 4.8 which shows how the productivity of the
tanker fleet peaked in 1973 when freight rates were very high and fell in the early
1980s when freight rates were very low.
Economic theory can help to define the shape of the supply curve. Provided the
market is perfectly competitive, the shipowner maximizes his profit by operating
his ship at the speed at which marginal cost (i.e. the cost of providing an additional
tonmile of transport) equals the freight rate. The relationship between speed and
freight rates can be defined as follows:19
THE FREIGHT RATE MECHANISM

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
140
E4(1)
FIGURE 4.12 Shipping supply and demand functions
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
This equation defines the shape of the supply curve. In addition to freight rates the
optimum speed depends on the price of fuel, the efficiency of the ship and the
length of the voyage. We will discuss these costs in Chapter 5.

141
In reality the supply function is more complex than the simple speed—freight
rates relationship described in the previous paragraphs. Speed is not the only way
supply responds to freight rates. The owner may take advantage of a spell of low
freight rates to put his ship into dry dock, or fix a short-term storage contract. At
higher rates he may decide to ballast back to the Arabian Gulf through the shorter
Suez Canal route rather than taking the longer ‘free passage’ round the Cape. All of
these decisions affect supply. Similarly freight rates are not the only way the market
adjusts shipowners’ revenue. During periods of surplus ships have to wait for cargo
or accept small cargo parcels. This reduces the operating revenue in just the same
way as a fall in freight rates, a factor often forgotten by owners and bankers doing
cashflow forecasts on old ships. They may predict freight rates correctly but end up
with an embarrassing cash deficit due to waiting time and part cargoes.
The next step is to show how the market adjusts the supply provided by a fleet of
ships. To illustrate this process the supply function for a fleet of 10 VLCCs is
shown in Figure 4.12b. The fleet supply curve (S) is built up from the supply
curves of individual ships of varying age and efficiency. In this example the age
distribution of the fleet ranges from two years old to twenty years old in intervals
of two years. Ship 1 (newest ship) has low daily operating costs and its layup point
is $155 per mtm. Ship 10 (oldest ship) has high operating costs and its layup point
is $165 per mtm.
The fleet supply function works by moving ships in and out of service in response
to freight rates. If freight rates fall below the operating costs of ship 10, it goes into
layup and supply is reduced by one ship. Ship 9 breaks even and the other eight
ships make a margin over their fixed expenses, depending on how efficient they
are. If shippers only need five ships they can drop their offer to $160 per mtm, the
layup point of ship 5. In this way supply responds to movements in freight rates.
Over a longer period the supply can be increased by building new more efficient
ships and reduced by scrapping old ones.
The slope of the short term supply curve depends on three factors which determine
the layup cost of the marginal ship. First, old ships generally have higher operating
costs so the layup point will occur at a higher freight rate. We discuss this in chapter
5. Second, bigger ships have lower transport costs per ton of cargo than small ships,
so if big and small ships are competing for the same cargo, the bigger ship will have
a lower layup point and will generally drive the smaller ships into layup during
recessions. If the size of ships has been increasing over time, as has happened for
most of the last century, the size and age will be correlated and there will be quite a
steep slope to the supply curve which becomes very apparent during recessions.
Third, the relationship between speed and freight rates discussed in E4(1) above.
The demand function shows how charterers adjust to changes in price. The
demand curve (D) in Figure 4.12c is almost vertical. This is mainly supposition,
but there are several reasons why this shape is likely for most bulk commodities.
The most convincing is the lack of any competing transport mode. Shippers need
the cargo and, until they have time to make alternative arrangements, must ship it
regardless of cost. Conversely cheap rates will not tempt shippers to take an extra
ship. The fact that freight generally accounts for only a small proportion of material
costs, reinforces this argument.20
THE FREIGHT RATE MECHANISM

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
142
Equilibrium and the importance of time
The supply and demand curves intersect at the equilibrium price. At this point
buyers and sellers have found a mutually acceptable price. In Figure 4.12d the
equilibrium price is $170 per mtm. At this price buyers are willing to hire ten ships
and owners are prepared to make ten ships available. The equation balances.
However that is not the end of the story. If our aim is to understand why freight
rates behave the way they do, it is just the beginning. We must be precise about
time frame. In the real world the price at which buyers and sellers are prepared to
trade depends on how much time they have to adjust their positions. There are
three time periods to consider; the momentary equilibrium when the deal must be
done immediately; the short run, when there is time to adjust supply by short-term
measures such as layup, reactivation, combined carriers switching markets or
operating ships at a faster speed; and there is the long run, when shipowners have
time to take delivery of new ships and shippers have time to rearrange their supply
sources. We will look at each of these in turn.
Momentary equilibrium
Momentary equilibrium describes the freight rate negotiated for ‘prompt’ ships
and cargoes. The ships are ready to load, the cargoes are awaiting transport and a
deal must be done. The shipowner is in the same position as the farmer when he
arrives at market with his pig (see Chapter 3, section 3.2). Within this time frame
the shipping market is highly fragmented, falling into the regions so familiar in
brokers’ reports—the Arabian Gulf, the Caribbean, USAC (United Stated Atlantic
Coast), etc. Local shortages and surpluses build up, creating temporary peaks and
troughs which show up as spikes on the freight chart. This is the market owners
constantly trying to anticipate when selecting their next cargo, or deciding whether
to risk a ballast voyage to a better loading point.
Once these decisions are taken and the ship is in position, the options are very
limited. The owner can ‘fix’ at the rate on offer, or sit and lose money. Charterers
with cargoes face the same choice. The two parties negotiate to find a price at
which supply equals demand. Figure 4.13 illustrates how this works out in practice.
Suppose there are about 75 cargoes on offer during the month. The demand curve,
marked D1, intercepts the horizontal axis at 75 cargoes, but at freight rises it curves
to the left because at very high freight rates some cargoes will be withdrawn.
The supply curve S shows there are 83 ships available to load, so there are more
ships than cargoes. Since the alternative to fixing is earning nothing, rates fall to
operating costs which equates to 18 cents a barrel, shown by the intersection of S
and D1. If the number of cargoes increases to 85 (D2) there are more cargoes than
ships. Charterers bid desperately to find a ship and freight rate shoots up to almost
$1 per barrel. A swing of 10 cargoes is quite common, but the effect on rates is
dramatic.
In this very short-term situation market sentiment can make rates very volatile.
If there are more ships than cargoes, but owners believe that rates are rising, they

143
may decide to wait (sometimes owners attempt to hide their ships from charterers
by reporting the presence of only one ship in their fleet, or waiting outside the
loading area). Suddenly there are more cargoes than ships and rates rise, at which
point the reticent owners enter the market and fix at ‘last done’. This is shown by
the ‘expectation curve’ in Figure 4.13. If the surplus of ships persists, the ships
which hold back may be unable to fix at all and rates quickly collapse.
The short run equilibrium
In the ‘short run’ there is more time for owners and charterers to respond to price
changes by moving ships in and out of lay-up, so the analysis is a little different.
The short run supply curve shown in Figure 4.14a plots, for a given size of fleet,
the ton miles of transport available at each level of freight rates. The transport
supply is measured in thousand btm per annum and the freight rate in dollars per
thousand ton miles of cargo transported.
At point A, the supply offered is only 5,000 btm per annum because the least
efficient ships are laid up; at point B, all ships are back in operation and the supply
has risen to about 8,500 btm per annum; at point C, the fleet is at maximum speed
and the whole fleet is at sea; finally, at point D, no further supply is obtained by
increasing freight rates and the supply curve becomes almost vertical. Very high
freight rates may tempt out a few remaining unutilized ships. For example, during
the 1956 boom ‘A number of vessels half a century old and barely seaworthy
obtained freights of up to five times the rate obtained a year earlier.’
FIGURE 4.13 Momentary equilibrium in the VLCC market
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
THE FREIGHT RATE MECHANISM

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
144
If we now bring the short run demand curve into the picture we can explain
how freight rates are determined. The market settles at the freight rate at which
supply equals demand. Consider the three different equilibrium points marked A,
B, and C in Figure 4.14b. At point A demand is low and the freight rate settles at
point F1. A major increase in demand to point B only pushes the freight rate up
slightly because ships immediately come out of lay up to meet increasing demand.21
However a small increase in demand to point C is sufficient to treble the level of
freight rates because the market rate is now set by the oldest and least efficient
ships which need very high freight rates to tempt them into service. Finally, with
no more ships available charterers bid against each other for the available capacity.
Depending on how badly they need transport, rates can go to any level. However
this is an unstable situation. Shippers look for cheaper supply sources and the high
freight rates almost always trigger frenzied investment activity by owners and
shippers.
The long run
Finally, we must consider the the long run during which the size of the fleet can be
adjusted by ordering new ships and scrapping old ones. The longer-term adjustment
mechanism balances supply and demand through the three other markets we
discussed in chapter 3, the sale and purchase market, the newbuilding market and
the demolition market. As freight rates fall during a recession, the profitability of
ships and, consequently, their second-hand value also falls. Eventually the price of
FIGURE 4.14 Short run equilibrium
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
Note: The supply function shows the amount of sea transport offered at each freight rate.

145
the least efficient ships falls to the scrap price. Ships are scrapped, removing them
permanently from the market and reducing the surplus. Falling second-hand prices
also make new uses of the surplus tonnage financially viable; the use of supertankers
for oil storage or bulk carriers as trans-shipment facilities are examples. In these
ways the price mechanism gradually reduces the supply of ships to the market.
Conversely, when a shortage of ships pushes up freight rates this works through to
the sale and purchase market. Shipowners are keen to add to their fleets and, because
there is a shortage of ships, shippers may decide to expand their own shipping
operations. With more buyers than sellers, second-hand prices rise until used ships
become more expensive than newbuildings. Frustrated shipowners turn to the
newbuilding market and the orderbook expands rapidly. Two or three years later
the fleet starts to grow.
To illustrate this process we can take the example of the adjustment of the tanker
market over the period 1980 and 1991. Figure 4.15 shows four charts, illustrating
the position of the supply demand chart in a different year, 1980 (chart a), 1985
(chart b), 1991 (chart c) and 1992 (chart d). The freight rate is shown on the vertical
axis measured in $000s per day and as an indicator of transport supply the tanker
fleet is shown on the horizontal axis, measured in m.dwt. Neither of these units of
measurement is strictly correct22 but they are are adequate for an illustration. In the
centre of Figure 4.15 is a freight chart (chart e) which shows the level of freight
rates in each of the four years. Our aim is to explain how the supply and demand
curves moved between the 4 years. In 1980 (chart a) freight rates were moderately
high at $15,000 per day, with the demand curve intersecting the ‘kink’ of the supply
curve. By 1985 (chart b) the supply curve has moved to the left as heavy scrapping
reduced the tanker fleet from 320 m.dwt to 251 m.dwt, but demand had fallen even
more to below 150 m.dwt due to the collapse in the crude oil trade after the oil
price rises in 1979. This left 60 m.dwt of tankers laid up, extensive slow steaming,
and the demand curve intersecting the supply curve way down its span at D85.
Freight rates averaged about $7,000 per day, close to operating costs.
Between 1985 and 1991 (chart c), despite heavy scrapping, the tanker fleet fell
by only 7 m.dwt, due to increased newbuilding in the late 1980s. As a result the
supply curve moved very slightly to the left to S91, but a growing oil trade increased
demand by 30 per cent to D91, suggesting an equilibrium freight rate of about
$15,000 per day. However, in 1991 another factor intervened. After the invasion of
Kuwait in August 1990 oil traders used tankers as temporary storage, moving the
demand curve temporarily to the right, shown by the dotted line in Figure 4.15c.
Freight rates increased to $29,000 per day. Then in 1992 supply increased due to
heavy deliveries and the demand curve moved back to its ‘normal’ position as the
temporary storage market disappeared. This was enough to drive freight rates down
to $15,000 per day (chart d).
It is the combination of volatile demand and a significant time-lag before supply
adjusts to demand which creates the framework for shipping market cycles.
Shipowners tend to base investment on the current state of the market—they order
more ships when freight rates are high and fewer when freight rates are low. The
delay in delivering these ships means, however, that demand may have changed by
the time the ships are delivered so any cyclical tendency is amplified.23 Our analysis
THE FREIGHT RATE MECHANISM

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
146
FIGURE 4.15 Long-term adjustment of supply and demand 1980–92
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

147
of the length of shipping cycles in Chapter 2 showed that over a century the
average cycle was about seven years long, which is about the length you would
expect in a market with the adjustment mechanism we have discussed. It takes two
or three years for new orders to be delivered, two or three years for scrapping to
catch up, and two or three years for the market to build up a head of steam for the
next round of ordering. Of course it never happens exactly this way, but it makes
a neat generalization.
Long run prices and costs
What determines the long-run freight rate in the shipping market? Where will
earnings average out? Will the average be high enough to pay for a new ship? This
is a matter of great interest to investors who, quite reasonably, want to know what
return they can expect in the long-term, taking one cycle with another.
The early economists argued that there is a built-in tendency for prices to cover
costs. For example Adam Smith distinguished between the market price, which
could be very variable, and the natural price which just covered the cost of
production. He argued that the natural price is the central price towards which the
prices of all commodities are continually gravitating.24 This is a comforting idea
for investors, since it suggests that if they wait long enough the market will ensure
that they will earn a proper return. It is, however, a very dangerous concept.
Marshall warned against placing too much faith in the idea of a ‘natural’ price
which, in the long run, covers costs. It is not that the theory is wrong, but that it only
works if the general conditions of life were stationary for a run of time long enough
to enable {economic forces} to work out to their full effect.25 The natural price is
unlikely to prevail because the world is constantly changing. Demand and supply
schedules are constantly on the move as technology and events change. Every change
alters the equilibrium amount and the equilibrium price. The unexpected intervenes
long before the ‘natural’ price has been achieved. This is the common sense view
which every shipping investor knows only too well. The world is far too mercurial
for the concept of a long run equilibrium price to be significant in an industry where
the product has a life of twenty years or more. Investors cannot expect any comfort
from this quarter. They must back their judgement that on this occasion prices will
cover their real costs. Economic theory offers no guarantees, and as we saw in Chapter
2, the returns have, on average, tended to be rather low.
4.5 Summary
We started this chapter with the idea that shipping companies should approach the
shipping market from a competitive viewpoint, i.e. playing other players. The rules
of the shipping market game are set by the economic relationships which create
freight cycles. To explain them we discussed the economic ‘model’ of the shipping
market. This model has two main components, supply and demand, linked by freight
rates which, through their influence on the actions of shippers and shipowners,
SUMMARY

SUPPLY, DEMAND AND FREIGHT RATES
148
bring supply and demand into balance. Because the demand for ships changes
rapidly but supply is slow and ponderous, freight cycles are irregular.
We identified five key demand variables, the world economy, commodity trades,
average haul, political events and transport costs. The demand for ships starts with
the world economy. We found that there is a close relationship between industrial
production and sea trade, so close scrutiny of the latest trends and lead indicators
for the world economy provide some warning of changes in the demand for ships.
The second important demand variable is the structure of the commodity trades,
which can lead to changes in ship demand. For example a change in the oil price in
the 1970s had a major impact on the oil trade. Distance (average haul) is the third
demand variable and here again we found that there have been substantial changes
in the past. Political events were the fourth variable, since wars and disturbances
often have repercussions for trade. Finally transport costs play an important part in
determining the long-term demand.
On the supply side we also singled out five variables, the world fleet, productivity,
shipbuilding production, scrapping and freight rates. The size of the world fleet is
controlled by shipowners who respond to the freight rates by scrapping, newbuilding
and adjusting the performance of the fleet. Because the variables in this part of the
model are behavioural, the relationships are not always predictable. Market turning
points depend crucially on how owners manage supply. Although the orderbook
provides a guide to the size of the world fleet twelve to eighteen months ahead,
future ordering and scrapping are influenced by market sentiment, and are very
unpredictable. Sometimes shipowners do things which economists find difficult to
understand, so relying too much on economic logic can be dangerous.
Freight rates link supply and demand. When supply is tight freight rates rise,
stimulating shipowners to provide more transport. When they fall it has the opposite
effect. We looked in detail at the dynamics of the mechanism by which freight
rates are determined and found that timescale is important in reaching an equilibrium
price. Momentary equilibrium describes the day-to-day position as ‘prompt’ ships
in a particular loading area compete for the available cargoes. Short run equilibrium
describes what happens when ships have time to move around the world, adjust
their operating speed or layup. In shipping the long-term is set by the time taken to
deliver new ships—say two or three years. This characteristic certainly influences
the 7–8 year duration of freight cycles.
Our analysis of supply-demand charts showed that the short term supply function
has a characteristic ‘hockey stick’ shape, while in the short term demand is inelastic.
Freight cycle peaks and troughs are produced by the demand curve moving along
the supply curve. When the demand curve moves into the ‘kink’ of the supply
curve, freight rates move above operating costs and become very volatile. In the
long-term the volatile freight cycles ought to average out at a ‘natural’ freight rate
which gives investors a fair return on capital. Although this is true in theory, Alfred
Marshall warned that we should not to rely on it. In a constantly changing world
long-term average earnings are not subject to rules. In the past the over-eagerness
of shipping investors has tended to keep market returns low, as we saw in chapter
2. Despite this, enough shipping fortunes have been made to encourage a steady
flow of hopeful investors and equally hopeful bankers.

149
No amount of statistical analysis can reduce this complex economic structure to
a simple predictive ‘rule of thumb’. The requirements of success in the shipping
cycle game are a lifetime’s experience in the shipping industry, a direct line to the
world economic and political grapevine, and a sharp eye for a bargain. Decision-
makers without the advantage of experience must rely on what they can glean
from books.
SUMMARY

