151
Chapter 5
Costs, revenue and
financial performance
Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen nineteen
six, result happiness. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure
twenty pounds ought and six, result misery
(Mr Micawber in David Copperfield)
Chapter 5

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
152
5.1 Cashflow and the art of survival
The impact of financial pressures on shipowners’ decisions
In this chapter we look at shipping economics from the perspective of the individual
shipping company. Every company faces the challenge of navigating its way through
the succession of booms, recessions and depressions which characterize the shipping
market. During prosperous periods when funds flood in it must meet the challenge
of investing wisely for future growth and a commercial return on capital. The seeds
of future problems are often sown under the heady influence of market sentiment
at the peak of a cycle. In recessions the challenge is to keep control of the business
when the market is trying to force surplus capacity out of the system by squeezing
cashflow. During these periods the shipping market is like a marathon race in which
only a limited number of entrants are allowed to finish. The race has no fixed
length, it goes on lap after lap until enough competitors drop out from exhaustion,
leaving the surviving runners to pick up the prizes.
In the last resort what sorts out the winners from the losers is financial
performance. The risks faced by shipping companies are illustrated by a ship sale
decision reported in Lloyd’s List during the 1980s recession (Figure 5.1). This was
at a time when the freight market was very depressed and the article reviews the
considerations that entered into the decision by a shipping company to sell a VLCC
from its fleet.
The circumstances are very familiar in shipping boardrooms during depressions.
The company was losing money—$14.5 million in the previous year—and the
ship was laid up and generating a negative cashflow. For several years the company
had accepted this drain on its cashflow, in the hope that the market would improve,
but the board had now decided that ‘with the benefit of hindsight it is evident that
our hopes for the future of the VLCC were ill founded’ and had decided to sell the
vessel. Its sale would mean writing off as a loss the remainder of its ‘book value’
not covered by the selling price, so the company would have to announce a large
loss, but the proceeds from the sale would improve the cashflow.
Since the vessel was turbine powered and had been laid up for several years it
was considered likely that at prevailing market prices the vessel would be sold for
scrapping. In the final paragraph the article discusses a further significant decision
by the group to sell its dry bulk fleet and concentrate entirely on the tanker market—
a strategic decision to sacrifice one part of the business to provide cash to allow the
remainder to continue, based on a belief that the prospects for the tanker market
were better than those for the dry cargo market.
On the basis of this example, the challenge is to create sufficient financial strength
when times are good to avoid unwelcome decisions such as selling ships for scrap
when times are bad. It is the company with a weak cashflow and no reserves that
gets pushed out during depressions and the company with a strong cashflow that
buys the ships cheap and survives to make profits in the next shipping boom. It is
not therefore the ship, the administration, or the method of financing that determines
success or failure, but the way in which these are blended to combine profitability
with a cashflow sufficiently robust to survive the depressions that lie in wait to trap
unwary investors.

153
Financial performance and investment strategy
If financial performance is the key to survival in the shipping market, the next
question is: ‘How is it achieved?’ The three key variables with which shipowners
have to work with are:
1
The revenue received from chartering/operating the ship;
2
The cost of running the ship;
3
The method of financing the business.
The relationship between these cashflow items is shown diagramatically in Figure
5.2. Revenue, represented by the box on the left, is received from trading the ship.
FIGURE 5.1 Newspaper report illustrating the commercial influences on a
scrapping decision
Source: Lloyd’s List, July 1983
Notes: Influence on scrapping decision: 1 financial performance of the owner, 2 age and size
of vessel, 3 market expectations, 4 operating costs (turbines use a lot of fuel), 5 scrap prices,
6 state of second-hand market, 7 book value of vessel in relation to its scrap or resale price, 8
cashflow of company, 9 management policies and attitudes
CASHFLOW AND THE ART OF SURVIVAL

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
154
As we shall see, the way shipping companies manage these cost and revenue
variables has great influence on the financial performance of the business. More
specifically:
•
The choice of ship influences the running cost. Day-to-day cash costs are
higher for old ships with ageing machinery requiring constant maintenance, a
rusty hull requiring regular steel replacement and high fuel consumption.
Modern vessels with lower crew costs, reliable fuel-efficient machinery and
negligible maintenance cost less to run.
Although shipowners do not generally control the price they receive per ton of
cargo, there are various ways of squeezing more revenue out of the ship. Increasing
cargo capacity to achieve economies of scale is one solution. A few thousand tons
of revenue earning capacity can make all the difference. Increased productivity by
operational planning, reducing backhauls, minimizing time off hire, improved dwt
utilization and cutting cargo handling time are other possibilities. From the revenue
earned by the ship must be deducted running costs and capital payments shown by
the boxes in the centre section of Figure 5.2. The costs include operating, voyage
and cargo handling costs, while capital repayments cover interest and periodic
maintenance of the ship. What is left after these charges may be subject to taxes,
though few shipowners are subject to this particular cost. The residual is paid out
in dividends or retained within the business.
FIGURE 5.2 Cashflow model
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

155
•
Running a successful shipping operation is not just a matter of cutting costs. It
also involves squeezing as much revenue as possible out of the ship. Revenue
may be steady on a long time charter or irregular on the spot market. It may be
increased by careful management, clever chartering and flexible ship design
to minimize time in ballast and ensure that the vessel is earning revenue for a
high proportion of its time at sea.
•
Financing strategy is crucial. If the vessel is financed with debt, the company
is committed to a schedule of capital repayments, regardless of market
conditions. If the ship is financed from the owners’s cash reserves or outside
equity finance there are no fixed payments to capital. In practice if a shipping
company has only limited equity capital, the choice is often between an old
ship with high running costs but no debt and a new ship with low running
costs and a mortgage.
The trade-off between new and old tonnage, single-purpose or sophisticated multi-
purpose tonnage, and debt or equity financing offers an enormous range of possible
ship investment strategies. Each shipping company makes its own choice, giving it
a distinctive style of operation which soon becomes well known in the shipping
market. However, once a fleet has been purchased and financed, many of these
parameters are fixed and the options open to shipowners become more restricted.
A good example of two very different investment strategies is provided by the
Greek and Norwegian merchant marines. After the Second World War many Greek
shipowners specialized in operating older tonnage with low debt and high equity.
The low fixed capital cost made it possible to lay the ships up during depressions
with minimum cashflow and make good profits during booms, often by the sale of
the ship itself. Conversely, Scandinavian operators tended to invest in modern,
highly sophisticated ships, which gave the maximum revenue-earning potential
through their high flexibility and ability to carry special cargoes. This strategy was
capital intensive and often involved a high degree of debt financing, with the result
that the ships had to be operated continuously throughout a depression. In this
sense, the Scandinavian strategy depended on minimizing unit costs on a continuous
basis, whereas the Greek approach was much more concerned with skipping
between market peaks. Both proved very successful for some shipowners.
The classification of costs
If we start with the basics, the cost of running a shipping company depends on a
combination of three factors. First, the ship sets the broad framework of costs
through its fuel consumption, the number of crew required to operate it, and its
physical condition, which dictates the requirement for repairs and maintenance.
Second, inflation in the cost of bought-in items, particularly bunkers, consumables,
crew wages, ship repair costs and the interest rates, all of which are subject to
economic trends outside the shipowners’s control. Third, costs depend on how
efficiently the owner manages the company, including the administrative overhead
and operational efficiency.
CASHFLOW AND THE ART OF SURVIVAL

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
156
Unfortunately the shipping industry has no internationally accepted standard
cost classification, which often leads to confusion over terminology. The approach
used in the present volume is to classify costs into five categories:
•
Operating costs, which constitute the expenses involved in the day-to-day
running of the ship—essentially those costs such as crew, stores and
maintenance that will be incurred whatever trade the ship is engaged in.
•
Periodic maintenance costs, which are incurred when the ship is dry-docked
for major repairs, usually at the time of its special survey. In older ships this
may involve considerable expenditure, so shipping companies often include a
‘dry-docking provision’ in their operating costs. Since this is a provision rather
than a cash item it is better treated separately from operating costs.
•
Voyage costs are variable costs associated with a specific voyage and include
such items as fuel, port charges and canal dues.
•
Capital costs depend on the way the ship has been financed. They may take
the form of dividends to equity, which are discretionary, or interest and capital
payments on debt finance which are not.
•
Cargo handling costs, represent the expense of loading, stowing and discharging
cargo. They are particularly important in the liner trades.
By analysing these different categories of costs we can develop a more thorough
understanding of the market economics discussed in Chapter 4. In particular they
provide an important insight into the shape of the short run supply curve and decision
process which drives the adjustment of supply and demand. There are two important
cost-related principles which we must explore, first the relationship between cost
and age, and second the relationship between cost and size.
Ship age and the supply price of freight
Within a fleet of similar sized ships, it is usual to find that the old ships have a
completely different cost structure from the new ones. Indeed, this relationship
between cost and age is one of the central issues in shipping market economics,
since it defines the slope of the short run supply curve shown in Figure 4.12 in the
previous chapter. As the ship ages its capital cost reduces, but its operating and
voyage costs increase relative to newer ships which are more efficient due to a
combination of technical improvement since the ship was built (for example more
efficient engines) and the effect of ageing.
An illustration of the way the cost profile changes with age is provided by the
comparison of the annual costs of three Capesize bulk carriers, one five years old,
one ten years and one twenty years, shown in Figure 5.3.1 All three ships are trading
under the Liberian flag using the same crewing arrangements and charging capital
at 8 per cent per annum. The overall cost works out at about $24,171 per day for
the 5-year-old ship, $24,165 per day for the 10-year-old ship and $20,942 per day
for the twenty-year-old ship. However, the structure of costs of the new and old
ships is quite different. If we consider only the direct cash costs and exclude capital

157
costs and periodic maintenance the modern ship costs only $12,038 per day to run
compared with $17,038 per day for the 20-year-old ship. This differential is due to
a higher operating costs, larger crew, more routine maintenance and lower fuel
efficiency (remember the owner trading spot gets paid per ton of cargo, so fuel is
an out-of-pocket expense).
This cost differential plays an important part in the cashflow ‘race’. If we
ignore capital costs and periodic maintenance, the modern vessel can survive at
freights which are way below the layup point for older ships. It is this differential
which determines the slope of the supply curve. Because spot earnings have to
cover operating and fuel costs, for any given spot rate the old ship generates less
cash than the new ship. If gross earnings for a capesize (i.e. before bunker costs)
fall below $17,000 per day for any length of time, the owner of the 20-year-old
ship will probably lay it up, since revenue does not cover operating and voyage
costs.2 Will the ship come out of layup? This is where periodic maintenance costs
come into play. Although these costs are postponable, they cannot be deferred
indefinitely. In this example, when the fourth special survey arrives at about twenty
years, the owner of the average ship is faced with a bill for $2.2 million, which he
FIGURE 5.3 Capesize bulk carrier costs and age
Source: Capesize Quality Survey (1993) Clarkson Research Studies
CASHFLOW AND THE ART OF SURVIVAL

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
158
must pay if the ship is to continue trading. He must decide whether the ship is
worth repairing. If he is pessimistic about the future and the ship is not in
particularly good condition, he may decide to sell for scrap. This is how the
scrapping mechanism works. It forces owners to decide whether their old ships
have an economic future.
It is not just old ships that are on trial during recessions. Capital costs cannot
just be written out of the picture. Ships financed with bank loans have a fixed cash
flow which may exceed operating costs by a considerable margin. In these
circumstances it is the owner of the modern ship who is on trial. If the freight is not
enough to cover financing costs and the owner defaults, the bank may enforce its
mortgage rights, seize the ship and sell it to cover the outstanding debt. In this way
the market filters out the substandard owners as well as the substandard ships.
Unit costs and economies of scale
The second economic relationship which dominates shipping economics and
complicates life for shipping economists is the relationship between cost and ship
size, usually referred to as economies of scale. Shipping is about moving cargo, so
the economic focus of the business is unit cost, the cost per ton, per TEU or per
cubic metre. That is where we will start. We define the annual cost per dwt of a
ship as the sum of operating, voyage, cargo handling costs and capital costs incurred
in a year divided by the deadweight of the ship.
From the many factors that have influenced unit costs during the twentieth century,
this has been particularly important. Because operating, voyage and capital costs
do not increase in proportion to the deadweight of the vessel, using a bigger ship
reduces the unit freight cost. For example, a VLCC of 280,000 dwt requires only
the same number of crew as a 29,000 dwt products tanker, and uses only a quarter
as much fuel per deadweight ton. Similarly, for dry bulk carriers the annual running
cost per deadweight for a ship of 170,000 dwt is about one third that of a 30,000
dwt vessel, as can be seen in Table 5.1. Provided the cargo volume and port
E5(1)

159
facilities are available, the owner of a large ship has a substantial cost advantage,
which enables him to generate a positive cashflow at rates that are uneconomic for
smaller ships. In this particular example, at a hire of $70 per deadweight per
annum, the owner of a 30,000 dwt bulk carrier would just cover his operating and
bunker costs, whereas the owner of 65,000 dwt vessel would generate a positive
cashflow of $30 per deadweight.
This explains why, over the last century, ships have got bigger. In 1870 brokers
talked about a ‘handy’ (i.e. flexible) vessel of 2,000 tons. In the 1990s a ‘handy’
vessel is over 40,000 tons. Since ships have grown steadily bigger over the years,
in practice age/cost differentials and economies of scale have worked together.
The penalty of size is the loss of flexibility, which impacts on the revenue side of
the equation by limiting the ports that can be entered and making it more difficult
to reduce ballast time by obtaining backhaul cargoes. Investors in the next generation
of bigger ships always face the risk that they have overstepped the mark.
The history of freight cycles is an economic struggle between the big modern
ships and earlier generations of smaller ships with outdated technology. Usually
the combination of size and efficiency becomes devastating when ships reach twenty
to twenty-five years old, forcing them from the market. However when the size of
ships stops growing, as happened in the tanker market during the 1980s and 1990s,
the economic advantage of the modern ships becomes less clearly defined, extending
the economic life of ships.3
5.2 The cost of running ships
The costs we discussed in the last section are just examples which illustrate the
general principles involved. In practice all costs are variable, depending on external
developments such as changes in oil prices and on the way the shipowner manages
and finances the business. To understand ship investment economics we must look
in much greater detail at the structure of costs. Figure 5.4 summarizes the key
points we shall consider. Each box in the diagram lists a major cost category, the
variables which determine its value, and the per cent cost for a ten-year-old ship.
Source: Drewry Shipping Consultants (1997), various
* Assuming 270 days at sea per annum at 14 knots
TABLE 5.1 Economies of scale in bulk shipping
THE COST OF RUNNING SHIPS

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
160
In the remainder of this section we examine how operating costs, periodic
maintenance, voyage costs and capital costs are built up to determine an overall
financial performance of the ship.
Operating costs
Operating costs are the ongoing expenses connected with the day-to-day running
of the vessel (excluding fuel, which is included in voyage costs), together with an
allowance for day-to-day repairs and maintenance (but not major dry dockings
which are dealt with separately). They account for about 25 per cent of total costs.
The principal components of operating costs are:
FIGURE 5.4 Analysis of the major costs of running a bulk carrier
Source: Compiled by Martin Stopford from various sources
Note: This analysis is for a ten-year-old Capesize bulk carrier under a Liberian flag at 1993
prices. Relative costs depend on many factors that may change over time.

161
and insured value of the ship, and the administrative efficiency of the owner.
Table 5.2 shows the relative importance of each of these components in operating
costs and compares them for ships of three different ages, a 5-year-old ship, a 10-
year-old and a 20-year-old. It also shows an average column which, for convenience,
we will refer as ‘operating costs’ in the following discussion.
Crew costs
Crew costs include all direct and indirect charges incurred by the crewing of the
vessel, including basic salaries and wages, social insurance, pensions, victuals and
repatriation expenses. The level of manning costs for a particular ship is detemined
by two factors, the size of the crew and the employment policies adopted by the
owner and the ship’s flag state. In total manning costs may account for up to half
of operating costs, for the Capesize bulk carrier shown in Table 5.2 they account
for 26 per cent to 32 per cent.
The minimum number of crew on a merchant ship is specified in regulations
laid down by the flag of registration. However, it also depends on commercial
factors such as the degree of automation of mechanical operations, particularly the
engine room, catering and cargo handling; the skill of the crew; and the amount of
on-board maintenance undertaken. The reduction of crew numbers by automation
and reliable monitoring systems has played a particularly important part in reducing
crew numbers.4 It is now common practice for the engine room to be unmanned at
night and various other systems have been introduced such as remote control ballast,
single-man bunkering and rationalized catering. As a result crew numbers declined
from about forty to fifty in the early 1950s to an average of twenty-eight in the
early 1980s. Current levels of technology on modern ships allow a basic crew of
seventeen in a deep sea vessel, while experimental vessels have been operated
with a crew of ten. Under some flags manning scales govern the numbers of
personnel required on the various types and sizes of vessels, and any reductions
must be agreed between the shipowner’s organization and the seamen’s unions.
An example of the operating cost structure of a Capesize bulk carrier is shown in
Table 5.2, subdivided into these categories. In summary, the operating cost structure
depends on the size and nationality of the crew, maintenance policy and the age
E5(2)
THE COST OF RUNNING SHIPS

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
162
An idea of the basic manning cost in 1993 is provided by the budget in Table
5.2. The crew cost of $445,125 for a 5-year-old ship covers direct wages, and
employment related costs. An additional $114,000 per annum is required to cover
travel; manning and support; medical insurance and victualling. The manning and
support item covers the basic management costs that apply to crewing—crew
selection, rotation, making travel arrangements, purchase of victuals and ship
supplies. In total these add 25 per cent to the crew bill for a 5-year-old ship, bringing
the total crew cost to about twice the basic wages. This may seem high, but it is
very much in line with overhead rates in land based industry.
TABLE 5.2 Operating costs of Capesize bulk carriers
Source: Capesize Quality Survey (1993), Clarkson Research

163
A more detailed account of the crewing arrangements of three Capesize bulk
carriers, one 5 years old, one 10 years old and one 20 years old is provided in Table
5.3. The modern vessel has a crew of twenty, comprising the Master, four officers,
three engineers, a Bosun, eight seamen and three catering staff. The 10-year-old
ship, where the maintenance workload is beginning to increase, might require a
crew of twenty-four, while a 20-year-old ship might have a crew of twenty-eight.
The extra crew includes an additional engineer, an electrician, four seamen and
one messman. They are needed to handle the repair and maintenance workload
which is a continuous cycle on an old ship and which can be carried out more
cheaply at sea.
The wages paid to the crews of merchant ships have always been controversial.
TABLE 5.3 Crew cost 160,000 dwt bulk carrier (1993)
Source: Capesize Quality Survey (1993), Clarkson Research
THE COST OF RUNNING SHIPS

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
164
The International Transport Workers’ Federation (ITF) lays down minimum basic
monthly wages for all ranks, as well as rates and leave as part of its world-wide
and Far East wage scale, but these are not universally accepted. There are, in fact,
wide disparities in the rates of pay received by crews of different nationalities. The
nationality of the crew is often governed by national statute of the country of
registration and under some flags shipowners are prevented from employing non-
nationals on their vessels. The cost per crew member may be 50 per cent higher for
a vessel registered under a European flag than for a comparable vessel ‘flagged
out’ to one of the countries of open registration such as Liberia, Panama and
Singapore, where employment regulations are less stringent. As the practice of
flagging out became more widely accepted in the 1990s, the cost differentials
narrowed and quality became as much an issue as cost.
These costs are certainly not standards. Shipowners have far more opportunity
than land based businesses to determine manning costs by operating under a flag
that allows the use of a low-wage crew and by shopping around the world for the
cheapest crews available. Exchange rates will be an important factor here if wages
are paid in a currency other than the one in which revenue is earned. Although
shipping is a dollar-based business, shipping companies typically find themselves
handling cashflows in many different currencies.
Stores and consumables
Another significant cost of operating a vessel, accounting for about 11 per cent of
operating costs, is expenditure on consumable supplies. These fall into three categories
listed in Table 5.2. General stores such as spare parts, deck and engineroom equipment;
cabin stores cover the various domestic items used on board ship, while the largest
is lubrication oil. Most modern vessels have diesel engines and may consume several
hundred litres of lube oil a day while at sea. Expenditure on spare parts and replacement
equipment is likely to increase with age.
Repairs and maintenance
This item, which accounts for 12 per cent of operating costs, covers all outside
charges associated with maintaining the vessel to the standard required by company
policy, the classification society and the charterers of the vessel who choose to
inspect it. Broadly speaking this cost can be subdivided into two categories:
•
Routine maintenance. Includes maintaining the main engine and auxiliary
equipment, painting the superstructure and carrying out steel renewal in those
holds and cargo tanks which can be safely accessed while the ship is at sea. As
with any capital equipment, the maintenance costs of merchant ships tend to
increase with age.
•
Breakdowns. Mechanical failure may result in additional costs outside those
covered by routine maintenance. Work of this type is often taken by ship repair
yards on ‘open order’ and is therefore likely to be expensive. Additional costs
are incurred owing to loss of trading time.

165
The typical maintenance costs for a Capesize bulk carrier listed in Table 5.2 cover
visits to repair yards, plus the cost of riding crews and work carried out on board.
All items of maintenance costs increase substantially with age, and a 20-year-old
vessel may incur twice the costs of a more modern one.
Insurance
Insurance accounts for 37 per cent of the operating costs of a Capesize bulk carrier,
though this is the cost item which is likely to vary most from ship to ship. A more
appropriate range might be 15–40 per cent. A high proportion of marine insurance
costs is determined by the insurance of the Hull and Machinery (H&M), which
protects the owner of the vessel against physical loss or damage, and Protection
and Indemnity (P&I) insurance, which provides cover against third party liabilities
such as damaging a jetty or oil pollution. Additional voluntary insurance may be
taken out to cover against war risks, strikes and loss of earnings.
Hull and machinery insurance is obtained from a marine insurance company or
through a broker who will use a policy backed by Lloyd’s Underwriters. Two
important contributory factors in determining the level of H&M insurance are the
owner’s claims record and the claimed value of the vessel. Ship values fluctuate
with the freight market and the age and condition of the vessel. Protection and
Indemnity insurance is obtained through P&I clubs, which insure shipowners against
injury or death of crew members, passengers or third parties, pilferage or damage
to cargo, collision damage, pollution and other matters that cannot be covered in
the open insurance market. The level of premium will be determined by the
shipowner’s claims record and other factors such as the intended trading area, the
cargo to be carried, the flag of registry and the nationality of the crew. In the early
1990s insurance costs rose very sharply and now account for 20–40 per cent of
operating costs. They account for 32 per cent of the operating cost of the modern
Capesize bulk carrier in Table 5.2 and 44 per cent of the costs of the 20-year-old
vessel.
General costs
Included within the annual operating budget for the ship is a charge to recover
shore-based administrative and management charges, communications, owners’
port charges, and miscellaneous costs. The overheads cover liaison with port agents
and general supervision. The level of these charges depends on the type of operation.
For a small tramping company operating two or three ships they may be minimal,
whereas a large liner company will carry a substantial administrative overhead.
With improved communications, many of these functions can now be undertaken
by shipboard personnel in tramping companies. It is also an increasingly common
practice for day-to-day management to be sub-contracted to specialists for a
predetermined fee.
THE COST OF RUNNING SHIPS

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
166
Periodic maintenance
Periodic maintenance is a provision set aside to cover the cost of interim dry-
docking and special surveys. To maintain class for insurance purposes, all merchant
ships must undergo regular surveys. The ship must be dry-docked every two years
and every four years must have a special survey, approving its seaworthiness. At
its special survey the vessel is dry-docked, all machinery is inspected and the
thickness of the steel in certain areas of the hull is measured and compared with
acceptable standards. The extent of these measurements increases with age. All
defects must be remedied before a certificate of seaworthiness is issued. In older
ships these surveys often necessitate considerable expense, for example in replacing
steelwork that, owing to corrosion, no longer meets the required standards. In
addition dry-docking allows hull maintenance to remove marine growth, which
would otherwise reduce the operating efficiency of the ship.
Table 5.4 shows a typical periodic maintenance schedule for a standard Capesize
bulk carrier. It covers the interim dry dockings and the special surveys. In total
eighteen cost areas are covered. Some, such as the cost of using the dry dock
($35,000) do not vary with age, but others such as steel replacement, work on the
hatch covers and the main engines increase very rapidly as the ship gets older. In
this example the periodic cost increases from $586,000 at 5-years old to $1,579,000
at 20-years. Naturally this depends on the ship. Owners who operate preventive
maintenance policies may incur lower costs, while for ships in poor condition the
cost may be much higher.
Voyage costs
We now turn to voyage costs, which can be defined as the variable costs incurred
in undertaking a particular voyage. The main items are fuel costs, port dues, tugs
and pilotage, and canal charges.
Fuel costs
Fuel is the single most important item in voyage costs, accounting for 47 per cent
of the total. In the early 1970s when oil prices were low, little attention was paid to
fuel costs in ship design and many large vessels were fitted with turbines, since the
benefits of higher power output and lower maintenance costs appeared to far
E5(3)

TABLE 5.4 Standard Capesize, lifetime periodic maintenance costs
Source: Capeside Quality Survey (1993) Clarkson Research

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
168
The shipping industry’s response to changing bunker prices provides a good
example of how the design of ships responds to changes in costs. Although the
shipowner cannot influence fuel prices, he does control the level of fuel
consumption. Like any other piece of complex machinery, the amount of fuel burnt
in a ship depends upon the way it is designed and the care with which it is operated.
To appreciate the opportunities for improving the fuel efficiency of ships it is
necessary to identify the way in which energy is actually used. Take, for example,
a typical bulk carrier Panamax illustrated in Figure 5.6. At a speed of 14 knots it
consumes 30 tons of bunker oil and 2 tons of diesel oil in a day. Approximately 27
per cent of this energy is lost in cooling the engine, 30 per cent is lost as exhaust
emission, 10 per cent is lost at the propeller, and hull friction accounts for an
additional 10 per cent. Only a residual 23 per cent of the energy consumed is
actually applied to propelling the vessel through the waves. Whilst this is a highly
simplified view of a complex process, it serves to focus attention on the areas
where technical improvements can, and have, been made—the main engine, the
hull and the propeller. The extent of the improvement can be judged from the fact
FIGURE 5.5 Shipping cost inflation (1965–95)
Source: Marine fuel oil prices from Petroleum Economist; other costs based on OECD consumer
price index, capital costs from Fearnleys contracting price for a 70,000 dwt bulk carrier (in $)
outweigh their high fuel consumption. However, when oil prices rose during the
1970s, the whole balance of costs changed. During the period 1970–85, fuel prices
increased by 950 per cent (Figure 5.5). Leaving aside changes in the fuel efficiency
of vessels, this meant that, if fuel accounted for about 13 per cent of total ship costs
in 1970, by 1985 it had increased to 34 per cent, more than any other individual
item. As a result, resources were poured into designing more fuel-efficient ships
and operating practices were adjusted, so that bunker consumption by the shipping
industry fell sharply. In 1986 the price of bunkers fell and the level of interest in
this aspect of ship design reduced.

169
that ships built in the 1970s typically consumed 10 tons per day more fuel to
achieve the same speed.
The design of the main engine is the single most important influence on fuel
consumption. Following the 1973 oil price rises, and particularly since 1979, there
were major improvements in the thermal efficiency of marine diesel engines.
Between 1979 and 1983 the efficiency of energy conversion in slow-speed marine
diesel engines improved from about 150 grammes per brake horsepower/hour to
around 127 grammes per brake horsepower/hour. In addition to lower fuel
consumption, engine operating speeds were reduced to below 100 rpm, making it
possible to use more efficient large-diameter, slow-speed propellers without
installing a gear box. The ability to burn low-quality fuel was also improved. In
some cases the fuel savings achieved were quite spectacular. Diesel powered VLCCs
built in the 1990s consumed 60 tons of bunkers a day, compared with fuel
consumption of 130–150 tons per day by turbine powered vessels built in the 1970s.
It is also possible to improve the fuel efficiency of a ship by fitting auxiliary
equipment. One method is to install waste heat systems, which use some of the
heat from the exhaust of the main engines to power a boiler that drives the auxiliary
engines when the main engine is running, thus saving diesel oil. An alternative
method is to use generators driven direct from the main engine while the vessel is
at sea. This means that auxiliary power is obtained from the more efficient main
engine rather than a small auxiliary engine burning expensive diesel fuel.
In operation, the amount of fuel actually used by the ship depends on its hull
condition and the speed at which it is operated. When a ship is designed, naval
architects optimize the hull and power plant to a prescribed design speed which
may be, for example, 15 knots for a bulk carrier or 18 knots for a container ship.
Operation of the vessel at lower speeds results in fuel savings because of the reduced
FIGURE 5.6 Energy loss in a typical 1990s built Panamax bulk carrier, 14 knots
design speed
Source: Compiled by Martin Stopford from various sources
THE COST OF RUNNING SHIPS

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
170
The exponent a has a value of about three for diesel engines and about two for
steam turbines. It follows from the cube rule that the level of fuel consumption is
very sensitive to speed. For example, for a Panamax bulk carrier a reduction in the
operating speed of 16 knots to 11 knots results in a two-thirds saving in the tonnage
of fuel burnt per day, as shown in Table 5.5.
For any given speed, fuel consumption depends
on hull design and hull smoothness. Between dry
docking, marine growth on the hull of the ship
increases its water resistance, reducing the
achievable speed by 2 or 3 knots in extreme cases.
Even after dry docking, the hull becomes
increasingly rough as the ship grows older and
the surface has been scraped and repainted many
times. The development of self-polishing paints
(SPCs), which also release a poison to kill marine
growth, reduces the incidence of hull fouling
between dry dockings. According to work carried
out by the British Ship Research Association (now
British Maritime Technology), a reduction in hull
roughness from 300 microns to 50 microns can
save 13 per cent on the fuel bill.
Taken together, these variables mean that there can be a very wide disparity
between the fuel consumption of vessels of a similar size and speed. For example,
the fuel consumption of two Panamax bulk carriers could differ by 20–30 per cent
depending on age, machinery and hull condition. Obviously the cost importance
of this difference in efficiency depends on the price of fuel.
Port charges
Port-related charges represent a major component in voyage costs and include
various fees levied against the vessel and/or cargo for the use of the facilities and
services provided by the port. Charging practices vary considerably from one area
to another, but broadly speaking they fall into two components—port dues and
service charges. Port dues are levied on the vessel for the general use of port
E5(4)
water resistance, which according to the ‘cube rule’, will be approximately
proportional to the cube of the proportional reduction in speed.
TABLE 5.5 How speed
affects fuel consumption for
a Panamax bulk carrier
Source: Sample of bulk carriers

171
facilities, including docking and wharfage charges, and the provision of the basic
port infrastructure. The actual charges may be calculated in four different ways,
based on: the volume of cargo; the weight of cargo, the gross registered tonnage of
vessel; or the net registered tonnage of vessel. The service charge covers the various
services that the vessel uses in port, including pilotage, towage and cargo handling.
The actual level of port costs depends on the pricing policy of the port authority,
the size of the vessel, the time spent in port and the type of cargo loaded/discharged.
For example, a typical port cost for a Panamax bulk carrier loading 63,000 tons of
coal in Australia in 1995 was about $44,600, while discharging in Rotterdam would
cost about $80,000. By convention, the allocation of port charges differs for different
types of charter. Under a voyage charter, all port dues and charges related to the
vessel are charged to the shipowner, while all charges on the cargo are generally
paid for by the charterers, except for cargo handling charges, which are generally
agreed under the charter terms. Under a trip charter or time charter, all port charges
are carried by the charterer.
Canal dues
The main canal dues payable are for transiting the Suez and Panama canals. The
toll structure of the Suez Canal is complicated since it is based on two little-known
units of measurement, the Suez Canal Net Ton (SCNT) and Special Drawing Rights
(SDRs). Tariffs are calculated in terms of the SDRs/SCNT The Suez Canal Net
Tonnage of a vessel is a measurement based on late nineteenth-century rules that
were intended to represent the revenue-earning capacity of a vessel. It broadly
corresponds to the cargo-carrying space below deck, though it is not directly
comparable to the more normal measurement of cargo capacity (net tonnage).
The SCNT of a vessel is calculated either by the classification society or by an
official trade organization, which issues a Suez Canal Special Tonnage Certificate.
For vessels wishing to transit the canal that do not have a certificate, the SCNT is
provisionally calculated by adding together the gross and net tonnage, dividing by
two and adding 10 per cent. Tariff are then calculated on the basis of SDRs per
SCNT Special Drawing Rights were chosen as the currency unit in an attempt to
avoid losses owing to fluctuations in exchange rates, as their value is linked to a
number of major national currencies. Suez Canal toll charges per Suez net ton vary
for different types and sizes of ships. For the Panama Canal a flat rate charge per
Panama Canal Net Ton (PCNT) is used (see chapter 8 for more details of the Suez
and Panama Canals).
Cargo handling costs
Finally we come to cargo handling costs. The cost of loading and discharging
cargo represents a significant component in the total cost equation, and one to
which considerable attention has been paid by shipowners, particularly in the liner
business. A traditional cargo liner can easily spend half its time in port. The
relationship is specified in equation E5(5) as representing the sum of loading costs,
discharging costs and an allowance for the cost of any claims that may arise.
THE COST OF RUNNING SHIPS

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
172
The level of these costs may be reduced by investment in improved ship design—
to facilitate rapid cargo handling, along with advanced shipboard cargo handling
gear. For example, a forest products carrier with open holds and four cranes per
hold can achieve faster and more economical, cargo handling than a conventional
bulk carrier relying on shore-based cranes.
5.3 The capital cost and financial performance
The third component in the cost equation is the cost of capital. In our ‘typical’ ship
in Figure 5.4 capital costs account for 39 per cent of total costs. In cash terms
capital behaves very differently from other costs. Crew costs, bunkers, insurance
and the other cost items are paid for as they are used. Capital costs may appear in
the cashflow in three ways. First, there is the initial purchase; second, cash payments
to banks or equity investors who put up the capital to purchase the vessel; and
third, cash received from the sale of the vessel.
The distinction between profit and cash
Before discussing this process in detail we need to be quite clear about the distinction
between cash and profit. ‘Profit’ is a concept used by accountants and investment
analysts to measure the financial return from a business. It is calculated by taking
the total revenue earned by the business during an accounting period (e.g. a year)
and deducting the costs which the accounting authorities consider were incurred
in generating that revenue. The cashflow of a company, in contrast, represents the
difference between cash payments and receipts in the accounting period. In surviving
shipping recessions cash is what matters, while for companies with investors
providing a commercial return on assets is equally important. The main reason
cashflow differs from profit in a particular year is that some costs are not paid in
cash at the time when the accountant considers them to have been incurred. In
shipping the best example is the timing of payment for the ship. The cash transaction
takes place when the ship is built. However each year the ship grows older and
loses value.
To give investors a fair account of whether the business is making money,
accountants have developed procedures for reporting large capital items in the
profit and loss account. When a capital item is purchased, its full cost does not
appear in the P&L account. If it did shipping companies would report a massive
loss whenever they bought a new ship. Instead the cost of the ship is recorded in
the company’s balance sheet as a ‘fixed asset’ and each year a percentage of its
value (e.g. 5 per cent) is charged as a cost in the profit and loss account to reflect
 E5(5)

173
the loss of value during the accounting period. This charge is known as ‘depreciation’
and is not a cash charge. The ship was paid for in cash long ago. It is just
bookkeeping, so profit will be lower than cashflow by that amount.
To illustrate this point, if a merchant ship is depreciated (or written off) over 20
years on a linear basis (and there are many different methods), it means one-
twentieth of its original cost is included in the company’s overhead costs each year
for 20 years. For example, if the ship was purchased for $10 million cash and
depreciated at the rate of $1 million per annum, the position might be as shown in
Table 5.6. In each of the first two years the company has the same profit of $1
million (line 3), which is calculated by deducting costs, including depreciation,
from the total revenue earned. However, the cashflow profile is quite different. The
operating cashflow at line 3 is $2 million in each year because depreciation is not
a cash item—it is simply a book-keeping entry, so it does not appear in the cashflow
calculation. From this is deducted the cash payment for the ship in year 1 giving a
negative cashflow of $8 million in year 1 and a positive cashflow of $2 million in
year 2.
However this is not the whole story. Not many shipping companies can afford
to buy their ships for cash. A particularly important aspect of cashflow is the
method used to pay for the ship. In Table 5.6 the company pays cash on delivery.
If the ship is purchased with a loan, the whole cashflow profile changes because
TABLE 5.6 Example of profit (loss) account and cashflow for shipping company
purchasing vessel for cash (equity) ($ million)
* Capital expenditure is covered by the depreciation item—see text
the cashflow now includes payment of interest and repayment of the loan. This
situation is illustrated in Table 5.7, which shows what happens if, instead of paying
cash, the ship is financed with a five-year loan. Although the company generates a
positive operating cashflow of $2 million (line 3), after deducting interest (line 4)
and capital repayments (line 6) it has a net cash outflow in both years. If the
company has sufficient funds available, this negative cashflow required to meet
finance payments may not present a serious problem. The problems arise if there
is a negative cashflow but no cash reserves to meet it.
THE CAPITAL COST AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
174
Cashflow costs and ‘gearing’
Capital is the cashflow item over which the owner has the most control at the
outset. Operating and voyage costs can be adjusted marginally, depending on the
ship he buys, but capital costs are completely variable. In cashflow terms they can
be very high or non-existent, depending on how the ship is financed. The initial
purchase of the ship may be paid for with cash, either from reserves or, in the case
of very large companies, from cashflow. In that case there is a one-off capital
payment and no further cashflow relating to capital until the ship is sold. Thus a
shipowner purchasing a new ship for cash will have no further cash costs and can
survive on a freight rate equal to operating and voyage costs. For the 5-year-old
Capesize bulk carrier quoted in section 5.1 this ‘fixed cost’ is $12,300 per day. An
alternative to paying cash is to borrow part of the purchase price from a bank. The
owner puts up some ‘equity’, for example 30 per cent of the purchase price, and
the bank provides a loan for the remaining 70 per cent. This commits him to regular
capital repayments, the size of which will depend on the size of the loan, the
repayment period and the interest rate. A 10 year loan could easily increase the
owner’s ‘fixed cost’ from $12,300 per day to $25,000 per day. The ratio of debt to
equity is referred to as ‘gearing’.
Security and bank lending policy
The terms on which bank loans are made available, and in particular the gearing
they permit, is very important. We will discuss debt finance in Chapter 6, but it is
worth previewing the way in which banks approach the repayment of interest and
principal on a shipping loan. Since most commercial banks lend money at only 1
or 2 per cent above the rate at which they borrow, there is little margin for risk—
the bank must be sure before it lends that it will receive repayment of capital and
interest in full. For this reason a major consideration in ship finance is the security
TABLE 5.7 Example of profit (loss) and cashflow for shipping company
purchasing vessel on five-year loan ($ million)
* Capital expenditure is covered by the depreciation item—see text

175
against the loan. A shipowner borrowing money must be able to satisfy the lender
that if he defaults the loan can be recovered. The following methods are used to
provide security:
•
Assignment of earnings, insurances etc.
•
The lender takes a first mortgage on the ship being purchased, giving him the
first claim on the proceeds of the sale should the borrower default.
•
A mortgage on other ships or assets may be offered. As with any security the
bank must be convinced that in a forced sale the assets will realize sufficient
cash to cover the outstanding debt.
•
The income from a long charter with a ‘blue chip’ company is assigned to the
lender and provides assurance that the cashflow will be available to service
the loan.
•
A guarantee of the loan may be given by the owner, shipping company, the
shipbuilding company constructing the vessel or a government agency such as
the UK’s Export Credit Guarantee Department (ECGD).
The choice of finance thus has a tremendous impact on the shipowner’s cashflow
commitments. During recessions shipowners who fund investment with equity are
safe so long as freight revenue is sufficient to cover operating and voyage costs.
The ship may not be profitable but at least the owner remains in control. The
shipowner who has financed his investment from debt faces a very different situation.
He must make regular payments to his banker to cover interest and capital
repayments. If the freight rate only covers operating and voyage costs, as often
happens during depressions, he must meet his financing costs from elsewhere or
lose control of the business to his bankers. Thus two shipowners running identical
vessels with similar operating and voyage costs face radically different cashflows
during a depression if one has financed his fleet on an equity basis and the other
using debt.
Taxation
Taxation does not figure prominently in the accounts of most bulk shipping
companies. The international nature of the business provides shipowners with the
opportunity to avoid tax by making use of the many flags of registration which
exempt shipping companies from taxation. In general the only companies that pay
tax are those who have some specific reason for doing so. Liner companies whose
business involves large staff departments often take this route. The other main
reason is to take advantage of investment incentives available to local businesses.
5.4 The revenue calculation
The classification of revenue
Before discussing revenue, something must be said about the way revenue is
received. As we saw in chapter 3, there are several different ways a shipowner can
THE REVENUE CALCULATION

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
176
earn revenue, each of which brings a different distribution of risk between the
shipowner and the charterer and a different apportionment of costs. The risks are
shipping market risk, which concerns the availability of cargo and the freight rate
paid and operational risk arising from the ability of the ship to perform the transport.
The costs are those discussed in the previous section. Each of the revenue
arrangements deals with these items differently:
•
Voyage charter. This system is used in the voyage charter market, the specialist
bulk market and in a rather different way in the liner trades. The freight rate is
paid per unit of cargo transported, for example $20 per ton. Under this
arrangement, the shipowner generally pays all the costs, except possibly cargo
handling, and is responsible both for managing the running of the ship and for
the planning and execution of the voyage. He takes both the operational and
the shipping market risk. If no cargo is available; if the ship breaks down; or if
it has to wait for cargo he loses out.
•
Time charter. The charter hire is specified as a fixed daily or monthly payment
for the hire of the vessel, for example $5,000 per day. Under this arrangement,
the owner still takes the operational risk, since if the ship breaks down he does
not get paid. The charterer pays fuel, port charges, stevedoring and other cargo-
related costs. He takes the market risk, paying the agreed daily hire regardless
of market conditions (unless the charter rate is linked to the market in some
way).
•
Bareboat charter. This is essentially a financial arrangement in which the charter
hire only covers the financing cost of the ship. The owner finances the vessel
and receives a charter payment to cover expenses. All operating costs, voyage
costs and cargo-related costs are covered by the charterer, who takes both the
operational and the shipping market risk.
A further discussion of these revenue concepts can be found in chapter 3. For
simplicity the discussion in this chapter assumes that revenue is earned as a unit
freight rate per ton mile of cargo carried.
Freight revenue and ship productivity
The basic revenue calculation involves two steps: first, determining how much
cargo the vessel can carry in the financial period, measured in whatever units are
appropriate (tons, ton miles, cubic metres, etc.), and, second, establishing what
price or freight rate the owner will receive per unit transported. In more technical
terms, the revenue per deadweight of shipping capacity can be viewed as the product
of the ship’s productivity, measured in ton miles of cargo transported per annum,
and the freight rate per ton mile, divided by the ship’s deadweight, thus:
E5(6)

177
This definition states that ship productivity, measured in terms of ton miles of
cargo transported in year t, is determined by the distance the vessel actually travels
in 24 hours, the number of days it spends loaded at sea in a year, and the extent to
which it travels with a full deadweight of cargo. By further examination of each of
these components a precise definition of productivity can be obtained.
Optimizing the operating speed
When a vessel is earning unit freight revenue, the mean operating speed of the ship
is important because it determines the amount of cargo that can be delivered during
a fixed period and hence the revenue earned.
In a high freight market it pays to steam at full speed, whereas at low freight
rates a reduced speed may be more economic because the fuel cost saving may be
greater than the loss of revenue. This certainly happens in practice. For example,
in early 1986 the VLCC fleet was operating at a speed of around 10 knots, but
when freight rates rose in 1988–9 it speeded up to almost 12 knots. For the same
reasons, a substantial increase in bunker prices will change the optimum operating
speed for a particular level of freight rates because it increases the cost saving for
a given reduction in fuel consumption.
The financial logic behind the optimum operating speed calculation can be
illustrated with a simple example in Table 5.8 which shows the effect of speed on
the cashflow of a ship for different fuel prices and freight rates. By slowing down
from 14 knots to 11 knots, the amount of fuel used in a year is almost halved,
bringing a saving in bunker costs that depends on the level of fuel prices. There is,
The concept of a ship’s ‘productivity’ is useful because it measures overall cargo-
carrying performance, encompassing both operating performance in terms of speed
and cargo deadweight and flexibility in terms of obtaining backhaul cargoes. For
example, a combined carrier potentially has a much higher productivity than a
tanker because it can carry a backhaul of dry cargo if one is available. The analysis
of productivity can be carried farther by subdividing into its component parts as
follows:
E5(7)
THE REVENUE CALCULATION

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
178
however, a corresponding loss of revenue, because at the low speed less cargo is
delivered. The size of this loss depends on the level of freight rates. As a result the
shipowner is confronted by a trade-off between lower costs and lower income, and
the balance will determine his decision.
To illustrate this point we can examine the circumstances under which it would
pay the shipowner to slow down to 11 knots:
•
Case 1: fuel cost $100/ton and low freight rates—he would save $502,000
costs but would lose $692,000 revenue, so it is not worth slowing down.
•
Case 2: fuel cost $200/ton and low freight rates—he would save $1,004,000
and lose $692,000, so it is worth slowing down.
•
Case 3: fuel cost $200/ton and high freight rates—he would save $1,004,000
costs but would lose $1,384,000 revenue, so it is not worth slowing down.
In fact, for any level of freight rates and fuel costs there is an optimum speed.
Maximizing loaded days at sea
A ship’s time is divided between ‘productive’ loaded days at sea and unproductive
days spent in ballast, in port, or off hire. A change in any of these variables will
affect the loaded days at sea, as follows:,
TABLE 5.8 The effect on speed on operating cashflow
E5(8)

179
Days off hire reflect time spent for repairs, breakdowns, holidays, etc. A survey of
bulk carriers showed an average of twenty-four days per annum off hire, though
this figure can be expected to vary with conditions in the freight market. Owners
will always attempt to minimize the time the vessel is not earning, but during
periods of low freight market activity the ship may spend substantial time waiting
for cargo, this being one of the major costs incurred during a market recession. For
example, a ship that waits twelve days for a cargo with daily operating costs of
$6,000 will have lost $72,000.
Port days depend upon the type of ship, the loading facilities available and the
cargo being loaded. The more time the ship spends in port the less it spends carrying
cargo. Homogeneous cargoes such as iron ore and grain can load very quickly
where good facilities are available—iron ore loading rates of 6,000 tons per hour
are common. Difficult cargoes such as forest products and general cargo may take
weeks rather than days to load under some circumstances. Ships handling bagged
sugar can spend a month loading or discharging.
Days spent in ballast is the third and most important determinant of loaded
days at sea. For tankers and other single cargo ships it is a simple calculation, since
backhauls are not generally available and the ship spends half its sea time in ballast.
For combined carriers, most bulk carriers, reefers and liners the calculation is more
difficult because these vessels can carry a wide range of different cargo types, and
are often able to pick up backhaul cargo. Relatively little statistical information is
available about the average time spent in ballast. A rule of thumb is ‘the bigger the
ship, the more time in ballast’. For example, a 30,000 dwt bulk carrier is always
better placed to obtain a backhaul than a 160,000 dwt vessel since draught
restrictions may limit the larger vessel’s ability to pick up part cargoes.
The financial impact of obtaining a backhaul cargo can be illustrated by the
example in Table 5.9 of a Panamax bulk carrier operating in the coal trade from
Hampton Roads, USA, to Japan during the shipping depression in 1985. At a freight
rate of $15 per ton this vessel would have a negative cashflow of $500,000 per
annum when operating on a 50 per cent ballast basis. However, by picking up a
backhaul of coal from Newcastle, New South Wales, to Norway at a rate of $15 per
ton, the vessel would generate a positive cashflow of $19,000 per annum.
Deadweight utilization
This refers to the extent to which the vessel travels with a full payload of cargo. In
other words, it is the ton mileage of cargo carried divided by the ton milage of
TABLE 5.9 The effect of the backhaul on cashflow
THE REVENUE CALCULATION

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
180
cargo that the vessel could actually have carried if it had always obtained a full
payload. In practice, the deadweight cargo capacity of a vessel represents a physical
maximum, and it is a commercial decision whether this capacity is fully utilized.
The shipowner always has the option to accept a part cargo and during the difficult
market conditions of the 1980s this became an increasingly common practice in
both the dry bulk and the tanker markets. The change was particularly noticeable
in the tanker market after the 1973 oil crisis, when the oil companies were no
longer able to match cargo parcels to ships.
In conclusion, the shipowner making ship investment decisions faces a trade-
off between revenue and cost variables. For example, a continuous self-discharging
bulk carrier may be capable of unloading cargo at a rate of 6,000 tons per hour, but
at the cost of higher initial investment and a loss of cargo deadweight owing to the
weight of the cargo handling gear. Similarly, a combined carrier offers the shipowner
the option to obtain a very high deadweight utilization by carrying alternate cargoes
of oil and dry cargo, while incurring higher capital and operating costs.
Containerization involves heavy investment in cargo handling efficiency, whereas
the ro-ro combines some of the benefits of containerization with a higher degree of
cargo flexibility. A discussion of the roll on, roll off and lift on, lift off vessels may
be found in Chapter 11.
5.5 Computing the cashflow
At the beginning of this chapter we discussed the crucial role of cashflow in
determining the ability of a shipping business to survive the long depressions that
are such a feature of the shipping market. We then examined the cost and revenue
items that underlie a shipping businesses cashflow, with a view to understanding
how costs can be controlled and how revenue can be increased within the overall
constraints imposed by the ship, the business organization and the legal framework
within which the vessel is operating. It now remains to discuss the techniques for
preparing cashflow calculations that can be used as a basis for decision making.
Four methods of cashflow analysis are widely used in the shipping industry,
each of which approaches the cashflow from a different perspective:
1
The voyage cashflow (VCF) analysis is the technique used to make day-to-day
chartering decisions. It computes the cashflow on a particular ship voyage or
combination of voyages. This provides the financial basis for operational
decisions such as choosing between alternative charter opportunities where
there are several options, or in a recession deciding whether to lay up the ship
or fix it.
2
The annual cashflow (ACF) analysis calculates the cashflow of a ship, or a
fleet of ships on a year-by-year basis. It is the format generally used for cashflow
forecasting. By projecting the total cashflow for the business unit during a full
financial year, it shows whether, on specific assumptions, the business as a
whole will generate enough cash to fund its operations after taking account of
complicating factors such as tax liabilities, capital repayments and periodic
maintenance.

181
3
The required freight rate (RFR) analysis is a variant on the annual cashflow
analysis. It focuses exclusively on the cost side of the equation, calculating the
revenue the ship needs to earn to cover its costs. This is useful for shipowners
calculating whether a ship investment will be profitable and bankers carrying
out credit analysis to decide how much to lend. It can also be used to compare
alternative ship designs.
4
The discounted cashflow (DCF) analysis is concerned with the time value of
money. It is used for comparing investment options where the cashflows differ
significantly over time. For example, a new ship involves a large initial
investment but is cheap to run, whereas an old ship is cheap to buy but has
higher costs later in its life. DCF provides a structured way of comparing the
two investments.
These methods are complementary and each approaches the cashflow in a different
way appropriate to the needs of different decisions.
The voyage cashflow (VCF) analysis
The VCF analysis provides information about the cash that will be generated by
undertaking a particular voyage or sequence of voyages. Typically the owner with
a ship which is ‘open’ on a particular date will have brokers’ lists showing cargoes
available in the relevant loading area. Sometimes there will be one obvious cargo,
so the decision is easy. In most cases, however, there will be several alternatives,
all possible but none ideal. He has to decide which cargo to take. This means
answering questions like: ‘Should I accept the grain cargo from US Gulf to Japan,
or from US Gulf to Rotterdam?’ ‘Should I fix now or wait a few days to see if the
rates improve?’ ‘Should I lay up the vessel or continue to trade?’ By providing an
estimate of the profitability of a particular voyage the VCF analysis plays an essential
part in making operating decisions.
An example of a voyage cashflow analysis is shown in Table 5.10. A Panamax
bulk carrier is on a multi-leg voyage from the US Gulf to Japan with grain, then
ballasting down to Australia, where it picks up another cargo of coal to deliver to
Europe before returning in ballast to East Coast North America to reload grain.
The aim is to estimate how much cash the voyage will actually generate.
Inevitably this table is in a summarized form. In practice, a more detailed voyage
estimating programme would be used. The five sections of the table are reviewed
below:
•
Section 1: Ship information. Details of the ship size, speed fuel consumption,
etc. In this case the speed is the same on the loaded and ballast voyage. The
ship, which is relatively modern, burns 33 tons per day on the laden voyage
and 31 tons on the ballast voyage. The bunker price is $109 per ton for bunker
oil and $169 per ton for diesel oil for the auxiliaries. Bunker prices vary
around the world and a bunkering plan will be considered, to ensure that the
ship bunkers in the cheapest location.
•
Section 2: Voyage information. Details of the voyage including cargo, distances,
COMPUTING THE CASHFLOW

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
182
port days and freight rates. In this case the cargo is 54,500 tons of grain and
62,375 tons of coal. A ship of this type would probably carry about 3,500 tons
of bunkers and stores, leaving an available cargo capacity of 62,500 tons, so
the vessel is not fully loaded on the first leg. On this voyage the ballast legs are
much shorter than the cargo legs. Both cargo legs involve lengthy port calls.
•
Section 3: Days on voyage. The time taken to complete the round voyage is
calculated from the average speed, the voyage distance on loaded and ballast
legs, and the port times. The speed is lower than the ordered speed due to the
need to allow a ‘sea margin’ for weather.5 This is an operational decision. In a
firm market the owner might take the ballast leg and a faster speed to save
time. For the reasons discussed earlier in the chapter, the cashflow may be
improved by changing the speed. The port time includes time taken waiting
for a berth, documentation, loading/discharging cargo, bunkering and a day
for transiting the Panama Canal. It is not always easy to estimate port times
precisely.
•
Section 4: Voyage cashflow. The freight earnings are shown in line 4.1. From
this is deducted the broker’s commission and voyage costs to calculate the
contribution to operating costs (line 4.4). This represents the cash generated
by the voyage towards paying the ongoing cost of running and financing the
vessel. Finally, the operating costs are deducted at line 4.4 to give the net
cashflow for the voyage (line 4.5).
•
Section 5: Operating costs. These are calculated for the vessel on an annual
basis and reduced to a daily rate using the assumption that the vessel is available
for hire 350 days a year. The daily rate is used to calculate the operating costs
attributable to the voyage in the voyage cashflow calculation in Section 4.
Since this is concerned with annual cash costs, the actual cashflow attributable
to operating costs will not necessarily fall within the time-scale of the voyage.
In this example the freight rates are taken from a period of recession in August
1992. The ship would earn just enough to cover its full operating and voyage costs,
leaving a surplus of $64,290 as a contribution to capital costs, an average of $509
per day. A modern ship of this type financed by debt may incur debt repayments
equivalent to $10–12,000 per day, so the charter would make no contribution to
finance costs.
So what does the owner do in this situation? He will not actually lose money if
he accepts the voyage at this level of freight rates. If there is a mortgage on the
vessel, he has a cashflow problem because the voyage will make little contribution
to meeting these costs. He will have to meet mortgage interest and capital
repayments from other income, or ask his bankers to defer payment until the market
improves. He will certainly consider other voyage options, but if nothing else turns
up it is not a difficult decision. He must take the voyage and invite his bank manager
to lunch.
For an older ship with higher voyage costs the decision is more difficult. If we
re-run the voyage estimate for a vessel which, because of its age, takes the voyage
a knot slower at 13 knots, but burns 35 tons a day loaded and 33 tons a day in
ballast, we estimate a loss of $28,432 for the voyage. This puts him in a very

183
TABLE 5.10 Voyage cashflow analysis
COMPUTING THE CASHFLOW

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
184
difficult position. If he accepts the charter he will not earn enough to recover his
voyage costs, even if things go as planned. With old ships he knows that things do
not always go as planned. However if refuses the cargo he will be even worse off.
The operating costs of $5,392 per day must be paid whether the ship has a cargo or
not. One option is to send the ship to layup, saving a large part of operating costs,
but unless the vessel is carefully maintained during layup its future value can be
badly affected.
In these circumstances it is easy to see how during recessions the business
becomes totally preoccupied with the problem of obtaining enough cash to pay
each day’s bills as they come in and with cutting costs wherever possible. The
lesson re-learned by each generation of over-leveraged shipowners and their bankers
is that once the recession has started it is too late. There are no real options. With a
real effort the owner might cut his annual operating costs to, say, $4,500 per day
using a cheaper crew, defer all but the most essential repairs and tightening up on
administration costs. However if he is highly leveraged, whether the ship is new or
old, the extra $1,500 per day will not make much difference to his cashflow. Indeed,
if he cuts costs too much it could lead to expensive operational problems.
If he cannot obtain sufficient cash from elsewhere, and if his bankers press for
payment, then the only option may be to sell assets to raise cash. This usually
means selling a ship, and brings us back to the sale and purchase decision that we
discussed at the beginning of the chapter in Figure 5.1. The problem is that a ship
that cannot generate a positive cashflow, even when well managed, will not
command a high price on the market. As desperate owners are driven to sell their
ships in order to raise cash, and as few potential purchasers can be found, the price
falls. For newer vessels, a speculative investor will almost always be found, but for
old ships whose economic life may not span the depression the scrapyard may be
the only willing purchaser.
The moral is that surviving depressions depends upon being able to generate
cash when other shipowners are losing money, and having enough cash reserves to
survive the recessions which, as we saw in Chapter 2, are a regular feature of the
shipping market. By the time the voyage decision arrives, it is too late. Banks
rarely lend money to customers who are in financial difficulties and if they do, it is
usually on very disadvantageous terms. Financial planning for such contingencies
must be undertaken before the ship is purchased, when rates are high, and the
shipowner still has some room for manoeuvre. Cashlow planning is the technique
to use.
The annual cashflow (ACF) analysis
Annual cashflow analysis is concerned with calculating the cashflow generated by
the business as a whole over a period of time. In this sense it is less concerned with
the ship as an operating unit than with the total cashflow that the business must
finance over a period of time, either months or years.
There are several different methods of calculating the annual cashflow, but the
simplest is the receipts and payments method shown in Table 3.11. The top of the

185
table shows cash revenue, the lower half of the table shows cash costs, and the
bottom line indicates the cashbook balance carried forward from one year to the
next in the company’s bank account. This simple example illustrates the ACF
technique for a one-ship company trading over a four-year period. The figures are
loosely based on actual market conditions between 1990 and 1995, and the freight
rates, prices, operating costs and the outstanding loan are shown as a memo item at
the bottom of Table 5.11. For simplicity, inflation and bunker price changes have
not been included in the analysis.
TABLE 5.11 Example of annual cashflow analysis for 280,000 dwt tanker built
1976 scrapped at fourth survey
The shipping company has an opening balance of $8.5 million (line 1). On the
last day of year 0 it purchases a 1975 built tanker of 280,000 dwt for $22 million.
A bank loan is used to finance 70 per cent of the purchase price, to be paid back in
equal annual instalments of $3.08 million per annum over five years. The remainder
of the purchase price is paid from the company’s own cash reserve. Receipt of the
loan from the bank is shown at line 2.2 as a capital receipt of $15.4 million, while
the payment for the ship is shown at line 4.4 as $22 million. In year 1, freight rates
COMPUTING THE CASHFLOW

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
186
are running at $31,824 per day and the ship generates total revenue of $10.8
million, more than enough to cover operating costs, voyage costs and capital charges,
so the company ends year 1 with a positive bank balance of $4.45 million. In each
of the following years, however, freight rates fall to $12,727 per day in year 2,
$17,768 per day in year 3 and $10,107 per day in year 4. Each year the company’s
bank balance is slowly eroded, so that by the end of year 3 the strong positive
balance has disappeared and the company needs to raise an additional $798,000 in
cash just to meet day-to-day commitments.
At the end of year 4 the negative cashflow would force the company to make
some major decisions of the type discussed at the beginning of the chapter. To make
matters worse, in year 4 the ship faces its fourth special survey and the estimate is
$5 million. One option, shown in Table 5.11, would be to avoid the survey by selling
the ship. During the recession the market price reported by brokers for an average
280,000 dwt VLCC built in 1975 has fallen to $8 million. However a ship due for its
fourth special survey is not in average condition and would not attract even that price—
a scrap sale at $6.3 would be more likely. With $3.08 million of the original loan
still outstanding and debts of $798,000, a sale for $6.3 million would leave the shipping
company with a loss of $1.487 million, compared with an opening balance of $8.5
million. Obviously this option would suit the bank, which would be repaid in full,
but the shipping company would have lost heavily on the deal. By selling the ship
any hope of recovering the losses would be gone.
The second option is to put the ship through survey and trade on. The cashflow
in Table 5.12 shows what would happen. First, the owner would have to raise an
overdraft of $10.5 million cash to meet his negative cashflow in years 3 and 4. This
will be very difficult. Few bankers are willing to lend to a business with no assets
and a negative cashflow. There is little he can do to raise money within the business.
Cost economies might be possible if the company is paying top rates to the crew
and maintaining the vessel to a very high standard. Closing expensive offices is
another source of economy. If rigorous cost-cutting saves $1,500 per day, that is
worth $0.5 million in a full year. This might convince his bankers that he is
determined to tackle the problem, but would not even pay the interest on his
overdraft. All he can offer his bankers is a straight gamble on the market and
bankers do not like to gamble. Bankers do not generally gamble, but they might
not be willing to take the unrecoverable write-off of $1.5 million which would
accompany foreclosure (see option 1). Choosing between foreclosing or providing
a $10.5 million overdraft is a decision most bankers would rather avoid. Such
decisions test the concept of ‘relationship banking’ which we discuss in Chapter 6.
On this occasion the bank’s decision to back the owner would pay off. The out-
turn in year 5 (Table 5.12) shows how quickly a company’s financial position can
change in shipping. Freight rates increase to $15,789 per day in year 5 which
brings in an extra $2 million income. In response to higher freights the market
price of the ship goes up to $11 million. Since the ship has now passed survey, it
would probably fetch this price if sold, so its real asset value has increased by 66
per cent from $6.3 million to $11 million in a year, adding $4.7 million to the net
worth of the company. Lower operating costs contribute an extra $0.5 million. In
total the company’s financial position has improved by $7.2 million. At the end of

187
that year the last instalment on the loan is paid off, so there will be no more
repayments. If he sells the ship he would end the year with a negative balance of
$.17 million, and he still has to pay interest on his current account. However he has
no debt and the ship has passed its survey. He has survived and by taking a gamble
he and his bankers have avoided taking a loss. If all goes well he will soon be a
very rich man.
As always in recessions, the crucial issue is survival. By the time the unpaid
bills start to pile up in year 4 it is too late to do very much—the right time to raise
questions about costs, efficiency and working capital is before the ship is purchased.
The example discussed in the preceding paragraphs shows how a realistic annual
cashflow analysis can provide the framework for thinking ahead and planning
financial strategy in the shipping market. If the shipowner had borrowed less, or
borrowed more and provided for emergency working capital at the outset the
problem would never have arisen. Or would it? We started this chapter by likening
competition in a depressed shipping market to a marathon race with only a few
TABLE 5.12 Example of annual cashflow analysis for 280,000 dwt tanker built
1976 traded through fourth survey
COMPUTING THE CASHFLOW

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
188
prizes. Someone has to lose. It is through annual cashflow analysis that shipping
companies can measure their fitness to finish the race, and identify those actions
that can enhance their chances of future survival.
The discounted cashflow (DCF) analysis
So far we have concentrated on cashflow analysis which helps management to
think through the implications of certain decisions in terms of the future cashflow
of the business. However, business is not just about surviving recessions. Staying
in business also depends on making a commercial return on capital and that calls
for sound investment decisions. Often the decision facing management is a choice
between two different investment projects where the future cashflows are well
established, but different. For example, consider a shipowner who purchases a
tanker for $45 million and is offered two different deals by oil companies, Big
Petroleum and Superoil Transport & Trading:
•
Contract 1: Big Petroleum offers to charter the ship for $18,000 per day for
seven years, trading 355 days a year. At the end of the charter the oil company
guarantees to buy the ship for $35 million.
•
Contract 2: Superoil Transport & Trading’s proposal is a little more complex.
To fit its trading patterns the company wants the owner to have the cargo tanks
epoxy coated. This will cost $3 million, bringing the total price up to $48
million. However, Smartoil is willing to buy the ship at the end of the charter
for $45 million. Also, they want to escalate the charter rate by $2,000 per day
from $12,000 per day in year 1 to $24,000 per day in year 7.
The owner is particularly impressed by Superoil’s contract. The charter revenue
over the 7 years of $44.3 million is exactly the same as for the Big Petroleum deal.
However the buyback terms are far better. He loses only $3 million on the ship
with Superoil, compared with a loss of $10 million in the Big Petroleum deal. It
seems he will be $8 million better off with Superoil. Although this seems obvious,
Superoil has a reputation for driving a hard bargain and the owner is worried. So
he should be. He has ignored the time value of money.
If we take the time value of money into account, we find that there is less
difference between the two offers than appears at first sight. The technique we will
use is known as discounted cashflow (DCF) analysis. The rationale behind this
approach is very simple. Investors can earn a return on their money, so cash promised
in the future is worth less than money in the bank today. For example if the interest
rate is 10 per cent per annum, $1,000 received today can be invested and in a
year’s time is worth $1,100. In contrast $1,000 to be paid in a year’s time is only
worth $1,000. It other words the $1,000 receivable in a year’s time is worth $100
less than $1,000 received today, so we say that the ‘present value’ of $1,100
receivable in a year’s time is $1,000. The ‘discount rate’ is 10 per cent.

189
Net present value (NPV)
The net present value method of discounting the cashflow uses a discount rate to
convert each cash payment receivable in the future into a ‘present value’, i.e. the
amount it is worth today. The method is as follows. The first step is to determine
the discount rate which represents the time value of money to the company. There
are several ways of determining which discount rate is appropriate. The simplest
way, if the company has a cash surplus, is to use the interest rate which the company
would receive if it invested the cash in a bank deposit. Or the discount rate might
be set at a level which reflects the average return on capital obtained from
investments in other parts of the business. Many businesses use 15 per cent per
year. Finally, if the company has to borrow to finance the project, the marginal cost
of debt might be more appropriate.
Once the discount rate has been agreed it is a simple matter of arithmetic to
calculate the discount factor which applies to each year in the calculation. In the
examples in Table 5.13 we use 12 per cent as the discount rate, since this is what
the owner expects to earn if he invested the money in the US stock market. A
‘discount factor’ is calculated for each year, as shown in row 4 of the table. Row 5
shows the discounted cashflow, calculated by multiplying the cashflow in each
year by the discount factor for that year. The discounted cashflow in row 5 is
summed over all years to produce the Net Present Value (NPV) of each project
shown in row 6. In effect the NPV shows how much better off the shipowner is in
putting his money into this project rather than the US Stock Market.
For Contract 1 the NPV is -$5,000. It seems he would be better off investing in
stocks, though not by very much. However the real surprise comes when we look
at Contract 2. The $8 million extra return from this project has completely
disappeared. The NPV is $58,000, which on a $45 million project is insignificant.
The reason this project looked so good is that all the extra revenue was received
towards the end of the project and was heavily discounted. In financial terms
Superoil’s offer is not significantly better than the Big Petroleum deal.
The internal rate of return (IRR)
An alternative approach to calculating the return on investment projects is the
internal rate of return. Whereas the net present value method starts from a net
cashflow in current terms and calculates the value today, the internal rate of return
technique works out the discount rate which gives a net present value of zero. The
internal rate of return in the two examples works out at 12 per cent for both projects.
This is exactly what we would expect since the NPV is close to zero in both cases
using a 12 per cent discount rate.
The calculation of the internal rate of return is an iterative process, and rather
more time-consuming than the NPV. Fortunately most computer spreadsheet
programs now have IRR functions which provide estimates quickly and easily.
 
COMPUTING THE CASHFLOW

TABLE 5.13 Example of discounted cashflow (DCF) analysis for tanker charter options ($ million)

191
5.6 Summary
In this chapter we have reviewed the shipowner’s financial performance. We started
by observing that shipping companies have a great deal of influence on their future
cashflow when they frame their strategy. The choice between new ships and old,
flexible ships or specialized and debt or equity finance all make a difference. Once
these major decisions are made an owner may use his management skills to optimize
cashflow on a day-to-day basis through efficient ship management and resourceful
chartering, but major cost and revenue items are beyond his control. They have
already been determined by the initial investment decision. Once these particular
decisions have been made, the owner is very much at the mercy of the market and
his bankers.
Cash is the difference between receipts and payments. Costs are subdivided
into operating costs (which represent the fixed costs of running a ship), voyage
costs (which are variable, depending upon the way in which the ship is employed)
and capital costs. Crew costs account for almost half of operating costs and the
shipowner can reduce these by purchasing a highly automated ship, which reduces
the number of crew required, or operating under a flag that allows the use of a low-
cost Third World crew. Voyage costs are dominated by bunker prices which can be
controlled or reduced by investing in modern tonnage with the latest fuel-efficient
machinery. Both operating and voyage costs are likely to be substantially higher
for an old ship than a new ship, while economies of scale lead to lower unit costs
for bigger ships.
On the revenue side the owner can play the spot market, in which he accepts full
market risk, or time charter which shifts that risk to the charterer. Earnings also
depend on the ‘productivity’ of the ship, i.e. the number of tons of cargo it can
carry in a year. Again we find that the initial investment decision has a part to play
in determining productivity by investment for rapid cargo handling, greater cargo
flexibility to enable the ship to pick up backhauls, and high speed. Drawing these
factors together with the influences on cost, we can deduce that in terms of the
trading cashflow there are many options. Age, size, technical flexibility and cargo
management all play a part in generating more revenue and cutting costs.
When we turn to the capital account, the picture changes substantially. The
large modern ship financed by debt carries an annual cashflow for interest and
debt repayment in excess of/its operating costs, whereas the small old vessel financed
on equity would have no cashflow obligations on the capital account. As a result,
during a depression the owner of a small; old vessel can afford to withdraw from
the market and leave his vessel in layup until conditions improve, whereas the
owner of the large, modern, debt-financed vessel faces a fixed capital charge that
must be paid even if the ship is laid up. If, however, he is registered under a national
flag he has little capital to depreciate against profits, and he will pay high taxes.
All of these problems and opportunities associated with cashflow can be brought
into focus by cashflow analysis. Three techniques were discussed, voyage cashflow
(VCF) analysis which addresses voyage decisions, annual cashflow (ACF) analysis
for longer term planning and discounted cashflow (DCF) analysis for comparing
projects when the timing of payments is an issue.
SUMMARY

COSTS, REVENUE AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
192
In the last resort it is for the shipowner to use the system that suits him best. The
trade-off between cost minimization, revenue maximization and the approach to
ship finance gives each shipping venture its own particular characteristics.
