193
Chapter 6
Financing ships and
shipping companies
For the ordinary investor, the tramp company remains a form of
investment to be avoided. It is a very special business and at its best
financed and managed by those who are versed in its difficulties
(A.W.Kirkaldie British Shipping 1913)
Chapter 6

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
194
6.1 Ship finance and shipping economics
Shipping is one of the world’s most capital intensive industries. Container ships
and tankers can cost up to $125 million each, about the same as a Jumbo Jet. LNG
tankers, the most expensive ships, cost $250 million each. The tankers carrying the
oil imported by the United States alone have a replacement cost of $150 billion. In
the early 1990s the bulk shipping industry invested about $20 billion each year on
new and second-hand ships.1 Capital payments dominate shipping companies’
cashflow and decisions about financial strategy are among the most important that
their executives have to make. For this reason alone ship finance deserves a special
place in the study of shipping economics.
Unfortunately some of the characteristics of the shipping business do not fit easily
with the financial community’s requirements. Prudent bankers like predictable
earnings, clearly defined financial structures, high levels of disclosure and well-
defined ownership. Shipping companies do not always satisfy these criteria. Revenues
are volatile, the assets are mobile, financial structures often lack transparency and
audited financial information is not always available. For many shipowners investment
in a ship is more than the acquisition of a transportation vehicle. It is a speculation.
Ship values change by up to 60 per cent in a few months. The owner can make, or
lose, millions of dollars and so can his bankers if things go badly wrong. The history
of volatility described in Chapter 2 is not likely to inspire confidence in potential
lenders, while the return on capital can hardly be attractive to investors. Despite
recent efforts by shipping companies to adopt more conventional financial structures,
shipping remains an idiosyncratic business to finance.
This brings us face to face with one of the paradoxes of the shipping business.
Raising finance should be difficult, but historically the shipping industry has often
suffered from too much finance. In 1844 George Young complained to a House of
Commons Select Committee that during the period 1836–41 mortgages for the
purchase of ships had led to an increase in the supply of shipping ‘inducing persons
without capital or with inadequate capital to press into shipowning, to the injury of
shipowners in general’.2 One hundred and fifty years later the same complaint can
still be heard. In the mid-1990s even the bankers were complaining about the intense
competition, with more than 150 banks targeting the ship finance market. In the
equity markets ship funds, K/S companies and public offerings have appeared and
disappeared in succession. There have been times when the industry has indulged
in phases of wild speculation, mainly using borrowed money. Whilst it would be
wrong to say that ship finance drives the market—that responsibility lies firmly
with the shipowners—it has certainly helped to grease the tracks of the shipping
roller-coaster.
Our aim in this chapter is to explain the role of ship finance in the shipping
market from the shipowner and the shipping companies’ point of view. First, we
will see how ships have been financed in the past and how ship finance has
participated in the successes and problems of the industry. Second, we will explain
how ship finance fits into the world financial system alongside other forms of
investment. Third, we will examine the different options open to shipping companies
wishing to raise finance. Finally we will draw some conclusions about the interplay

195
between the activities of bankers on the four shipping markets discussed in chapter
4 and the way in which bankers should approach this form of lending.
6.2 How ships have been financed in the past
Ship finance in the pre-steam era
Although the history of ship finance can be traced back to the joint stock companies
of the sixteenth century, the logical starting point for this discussion is the 1850s
when steam ships started to appear in significant numbers. A widely used technique
was the ‘sixty fourth’ company. In the United Kingdom a ship is registered as
sixty-four shares, so an investor could buy part of a ship as a stand alone investment.
An investor who bought thirty-two sixty-fourths owned half the ship, while to hold
sixty-four equal shares was to be a sole owner. Legally shareholders were tenants
in common, each having a separate interest which could be sold or mortgaged
without reference to other owners of the vessel.3
There were three ownership structures. Shares could be held by individuals on
their own account, by individuals organized into partnerships, or by investors in a
joint stock enterprise. However, most ships were owned by one person. According
to records for ships registered in the City of London in 1848, out of 554 vessels, 89
per cent were owned by individuals and 8 per cent by trading partnerships. The
remaining 3 per cent were owned by joint stock companies. Only 18 per cent of the
vessels were mortgaged, mainly to cover the cost of repairs.4 Where partnerships
were used, they were generally limited to only two or three partners, possibly
reflecting the difficulty of managing larger groups.
The evolution of the shipping corporation
As ships grew in size during the second half of the century, the joint stock company
rapidly became the preferred financial vehicle for raising the large sums of money
required. A major factor in this development was the UK Companies ‘Limited
Liability’ Act 1862 which protected investors from liability claims by company
creditors. This opened the way for small investors whose other assets were now
protected, though share ownership in such a risky and individualistic business tended
to be restricted to family and friends.
A good example is the Tyne Steam Shipping Company which was formed as a
joint stock company with limited liability on 1 July 1864. The company was to
carry the growing bulk export trade of bulk coal from Newcastle on Tyne. It owned
the first bulk carrier the John Bowes (see Chapter 10). The nominal capital was set
at £300,000 in 12,000 shares of £25 each. Initially 10,100 shares were issued on
which £18 was paid up, raising £181,800. This was used to purchase 10 vessels for
£150,000, leaving £30,000 working capital. Approximately one quarter of the shares
were taken by previous owners of the new company’s steamers and the rest were
sold, as far as possible, to the public locally because ‘a shareholder at London,
Liverpool or Manchester brings little business to the company’.5 This company is
typical of many others in the international shipping industry at this time. Some
such as Cunard, P&O, and Hapag-Lloyd are still in operation.
HOW SHIPS HAVE BEEN FINANCED IN THE PAST

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
196
Although these companies were capitalized with equity raised from the public,
share ownership was often closely controlled and many companies relied on self-
financing or borrowing rather than share capital to finance expansion. For example
share ownership in the Charante Shipping Company Ltd which was set up in 1884
with share capital of £512,000, and a fleet of 22 vessels, was ‘limited to a small
and closely-knit family group’.6 In each subsequent year, with only two exceptions,
the company ordered at least two new ships, and by 1914 the fleet had increased
from twenty-two ships to fifty-seven. No further capital was raised and investment
was paid for from cashflow. Figure 6.1 compares the cost of the investment
programme with the company’s charter revenue, showing that adequate investment
funds were available, despite the many freight recessions (see chapter 3 which
reviews these cycles). Majority ownership remained with three families, the
Harrisons, the Hughes and the Williamsons.
Other companies were less conservative. In the nineteenth century borrowing
was common. According to Sturmey (1962), during the long recession of 1904–11
many heavily indebted lines failed and ‘the financially conservative men who
controlled the major shipping lines observed the failure and took the lesson to
heart’. For the next 50 years British shipowners stuck firmly to the policy of
financing investment from accumulated depreciation reserves. ‘Borrowing became
anathema’7 In 1969 the Rochdale Committee on Shipping found that only £160
million out of over £1,000 million capital employed by British owners was
FIGURE 6.1 Charante Shipping Company: investment and charter
income 1885–1914
Source: Hyde (1967), Appendix 1

197
represented by loans, a 16 per cent gearing rate.8 The same financial conservatism
was shared by many of the older established Greek names.
Although this policy provided protection against recessions, earnings were never
strong enough to fund expansion or attract external equity. Between 1950 and
1970 the return on British shipping shares averaged only 6 per cent per annum
compared with 15 per cent per annum for all companies. As a result, although
most of the larger shipping companies were publicly listed, no cash was raised by
issuing equity capital to the public9 and the British fleet played little part in the
post-war bulk shipping boom.
Charter backed finance in the 1950s and 1960s
In the 1950s the balance of financial conservatism, with its protection from market
cycles and high leverage which boosts the return on equity, took a new turn. The
rapidly growing industrial economies in Europe and Japan needed cheap raw
materials. Industrial shippers, particularly oil companies and steelmakers, started
to look abroad for new supply sources. As a result an important new player entered
the ship financing game, the industrial shipper. Prior to this development merchant
ships were mainly liners or tramps. Shipping was not part of an integrated industrial
operation. As more materials were sourced abroad shippers had a vested interest in
the shipping operation—if oil companies were to obtain the cheapest possible
transport, it was in their interest to encourage economies of scale. This led to the
practice of charter backed finance. Oil companies and steel mills offered shipowners
time charters as an incentive to order large vessels which were too specialized in
their trading opportunities to make attractive speculative investments. The owner
would then use the time charter as cashflow collateral for a loan to buy the ship.
Charter backed financing seems to have originated in the 1920s when the Norwegians
started to build up a tanker fleet, most of which was on charter to major oil companies.
In 1927, as part of their fleet replacement programme, Anglo Saxon Petroleum Ltd
offered 37 ten-year-old tankers for £60–70,000 each with ten year time charters.
The financing terms were 20 per cent cash down and the balance over five years at 5
per cent interest.10 Twenty-six were bought by Norwegians, mostly newcomers to
the business, and they turned out to be very profitable. After the war licences allowing
Norwegian owners to order ships abroad were only awarded if the vessel was 100 per
cent financed abroad. Soon adept Norwegian brokers perfected borrowing techniques
based on pre-construction time charters. This initiated the great expansion of the
Norwegian fleet which, during the 1950s, almost trebled in size, drawing heavily on
finance raised from American banks.11 The Greeks were also quick to exploit this
opportunity. A high proportion of tanker construction was financed with American
loan capital and ‘Greek owners appear to have operated largely on the basis of
securing a time charter for 7 or even 15 years from an oil company, a 95 per cent
mortgage from American financiers on the security of the time charter, then building
to fit the charter and finally sitting back to enjoy the profits’.12 US shipowners were
equally active, though the charter back system was refined to its most sophisticated
form in the ‘Shikumi-Sen’ arrangements developed between Japanese charterers
and Hong Kong shipping entrepreneurs.
HOW SHIPS HAVE BEEN FINANCED IN THE PAST

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
198
The new form of financing called for a different form of legal and business
organization. The result was the ‘single ship company’. Using the Flags of
Convenience developed for this purpose (see chapter 12), these one-ship companies
were built into complex business empires. The individual ships were registered
offshore using one-ship companies. Ownership was vested in the group, with
management often handled through agencies. For financing purposes the ships
could be treated as self-contained units secured by their time charters. Organization
structures were loose with few published financial accounts, little regulation and
no taxation.
This phase lasted about 20 years, but during the 1970s and 1980s gradually
shrank in importance. There seem to have been three reasons. First, the charters
had been made available during a period of structural change when it was in the
interests of charterers to encourage owners to take the risk of ordering ever larger
vessels. By the early 1970s economies of scale had been pushed to their limit and
it was no longer necessary for shippers to make this onerous commitment in order
to secure the ships they needed. Second, after two decades of headlong growth in
the bulk trades, there was a change of trend and the crude oil and iron ore trades
stopped growing (see chapter 4). Third, some shipowners who had expected to ‘sit
back and enjoy the profits’ found themselves locked into contracts whose small
profit margins were eaten away by inflation. Worse still was the failure of several
charterers to honour their commitments, notably Sanko in the mid-1980s.
Asset backed finance in the 1970s
As a result, in the early 1970s, after two decades of highly leveraged charter-
backed finance, shipping bankers started to revise their lending policies. Instead of
securing the loan against a long-term contract, for a brief, but disastrous spell in
the early 1970s the financiers became prepared to rely on the first mortgage on the
hull, with little additional security. A prominent banker summarized the reasons
for this change as follows. ‘A long-term charter-party with no or few escalation
clauses built into it can be disastrous to the shipowner… Inflation, engine
breakdowns and other accidents as well as changes in currencies can very quickly
alter or wipe out the best planned cash flows… On the other hand, shipowners who
run vessels on the spot market have recently been better off… Many bankers have
objected to a gearing of 1 to 5, or lending of up to 80 per cent of the cost price or
market value of the vessel… I believe that from a commercial bank’s point of view
this form of lending has caused no major disasters, and the main reason is perhaps
that good, well maintained modern ships have retained their value or even
appreciated’.13 In short, bankers started to see shipping as a form of ‘floating real
estate’.
This was a very fundamental change of policy because it removed the link
between supply and demand. During the period of charter backed finance,
newbuilding was restricted by the availability of charters. If the hull was regarded
as acceptable collateral, there was no limit to the number of ships which could be
ordered from the slimmest equity base. When, in 1973, petrodollars flooded into
the world capital markets, shipping seemed an obvious target. The tanker industry

199
was swept away on a tidal wave of credit which allowed 105 million deadweight
of tankers, representing 55 per cent of the fleet, to be ordered in a single year. In
the stampede for business, financing standards became so casual that loan syndications
could be arranged by telephone with little documentation and few questions asked.14
It took the tanker market 15 years to recover.
Unfortunately that was not the end of the story. In the early 1980s the money
markets were again awash with petrodollars, generated by $40 per barrel oil and,
to make matters worse, desperate shipbuilders started to use credit as a thinly
disguised way of building for stock. Mortgage backed debt underpinned orders for
40 mt deadweight of bulk carriers in 1983/4 when freight rates were at rock
bottom. The rationale was counter-cyclical ordering, but the volume of orders was
so great that the cycle did not turn. With so many deliveries, the recession dragged
on through 1986 and the owners could not service their debt, causing many defaults
and reducing second-hand ship prices to distress levels as owners were forced to
sell ships to raise cash.
Financing asset play in the 1980s
As the shipping market cycle bottomed out in the mid-1980s, the distress sales
created opportunities for ‘asset play’ (i.e. buying ships cheaply and selling them at
higher prices). The problem was that conventional sources of equity and debt had
no interest in additional shipping exposure, so new sources of finance were required.
One of the first devices to emerge was the self-liquidating ship fund. ‘Bulk
Transport’, the first of these schemes, was set up in February 1984 and proved
very successful, with assets appreciating to four times their purchase price during
the following 4 years (see page 208). As the success of the early schemes filtered
into the market place, imitators appeared, using the same basic structure and offering
equity to non-shipping investors. Ironically, as the asset values increased it became
progressively easier to place the equity. Eventually, a total of about $5–600 million
was raised. Very few investors made a commercial return and some lost their money.
A parallel development was the re-emergence of the Norwegian KS Limited
Partnership. Much has been made of the impact of the KS market on second-hand
ship prices during the 1980s, and rightly so. KS partnership structures were similar
to ship funds, or indeed the trading partnerships of the 1840s, but had the added
advantage that profits earned by investors were tax free, provided they were re-
invested within a specified period. At a time of very high tax rates in Norway this
was very attractive to private investors, many of whom invested in K/S companies
set up to buy ships. Perhaps the most significant development was not so much the
KS structure, which had been available for many years, but the growth of the
Norwegian banks during this period. At the beginning of the 1980s the Norwegian
banks carried a shipping portfolio, variously estimated at around $1 billion. During
the 1980s it grew to a peak of around $6–7 billion in 1989. The availability of this
finance and the willingness of Norwegian banks to make advances to the KS
companies, despite their unconventional structure, must surely be one of the key
factors in determining the phenomenal success of this market (see page 207 below
for more details of the K/S structure).
HOW SHIPS HAVE BEEN FINANCED IN THE PAST

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
200
Shipbuilding credit
A source of ship finance available throughout the period was shipbuilding credit.
During each of the recessions reviewed in Chapter 2 shipyards would compete by
offering shipowners favourable credit. This practice was already common in the
nineteenth century when some UK shipbuilders would, out of their own funds,
allow a reliable client 25–30 per cent credit for 3–5 years to tide them over a
period of low freight rates. By the early twentieth century governments had decided
that shipbuilding was an important strategic industry and became involved in the
provision of subsidised credit. In the 1920s the German and French Governments
offered favourable credit terms to help their yards win business against the then
dominant British shipbuilding industry. During the recession of the 1930s, the
Danish, French and German Governments all offered government credit schemes
to owners. The practice of subsidizing credit reappeared in the first major post-
Second World War recession 1958–63 and was regulated by the OECD
understanding on export credit in 1969. The provision of credit is generally co-
ordinated by a government controlled credit agency (ECGD in UK, Hermes in
Germany, COFACE in France, KEXIM in Korea, Exim Bank in Japan etc). These
agencies are responsible for co-ordinating the credit on behalf of the government
and providing financial guarantees and interest rate support when appropriate.
6.3. The world financial system and types of finance
Where does the money to finance ships come from?
This brief historical review has touched on many ways of financing shipping,
showing how the financial techniques employed have changed from one decade to
another. We now turn to a more rigorous discussion of the financial structures
currently in use. Raising ship finance is essentially a matter of persuasion, so a
good starting point is to return to two basic questions. First, ‘where does the money
to finance ships come from’ and, second, ‘what do businessmen have to do to get
it?’
To answer these questions we need to look at the world financial system as a
whole. The flow chart in Figure 6.2 shows how the different parts of the system fit
together. Column 3 on the right shows the source investment funds; column 2
shows the markets where these funds are traded, while column 1 shows the
‘arrangers’ who act as intermediaries and risktakers in providing the shipping
business with access to the pool of funds in columns 2 and 3.
Investment funds come from savings
First the source: the money comes from corporate or personal ‘savings’ which
need to be invested. Some corporations and individuals handle the investment
themselves. For example, an individual might buy a house as an investment and let

FIGURE 6.2 Where the money comes from to finance ships
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
202
it out. However this is much less common than it used to be. Nowadays about 80
per cent of savings end up in the hands of professional investment managers such
as insurance companies, pension funds, savings banks, finance houses, trust funds,
mutual funds and commercial banks who take money on deposit, so called
‘institutional investors’.15
Investors and lenders
These professional managers have two options. They can invest the money, or they
can lend it. The investor commits his funds to a business venture in return for a
share of the profits. Usually he only gets his money back by selling his ‘equity’
stake in the business to someone else. In contrast, the lender advances money for a
predetermined period in return for regular interest payments. By the end of the
agreed period the ‘debt’ must be repaid in full. This is an important distinction for
anyone trying to raise finance because investors and lenders see the world from a
very different perspective.
Investors take risk for profit, so they are interested in the upside. How profitable
could the investment be? Is this a business which could make 30 per cent return? Is
there a convincing reason why profits will be high? Lenders just get paid interest,
so they want to be sure they will be repaid. This makes them more interested in the
downside. Is the business sound? Could it survive in an adverse market? Are the
borrowers taking risks that might damage their ability to repay? Since lenders do
not share the profits they are less interested in this aspect of the business. Shipowners
are often puzzled about why bankers are more interested in recessions than booms.
This is the reason.
Private placement of debt or equity
One method open to ‘fund managers’ is to place funds directly with companies
who need finance. This is known as private placement. The lender, who might be
a pension fund or an insurance company, negotiates a financial agreement to suit
both borrower and lender. The structure of this agreement could be either debt or
equity. Whilst private placement is quite widely used, especially for long-term
loans, as a general technique for managing investment, it presents practical
difficulties. Fund managers face the administrative task of analysing detailed
investment proposals. More importantly, the loan or investment is not liquid. Once
the transaction is placed, there is little the investor can do to adjust his portfolio of
such loans and investments. In practice this market is only accessible to shipping
companies of investment grade quality.
The financial markets buy and sell packaged
investment funds
An alternative is to use the financial markets. Ingeniously, the world financial system
has succeeded in developing markets which trade investments as commodities. In

203
these markets investment ‘packages’ are bought and sold in a standardized form
called ‘securities’. Securitizing investment is rather like containerizing cargo. It
takes a unique investment packages and processes it into a unit which conforms to
rigid standards and is thus easy to buy and sell. Securities markets are strictly
regulated to ensure that the rules are followed. There are three different markets
trading in different types of security:
1
Money Markets: trade in short-term debt (less than a year). The ‘market’ consists
of a loose network of banks and dealers linked by telex, telephones and
computers (rather like the voyage charter market) who deal in anything which
is sufficiently standardized and credit-worthy to be traded.16 For example, a
shipowner with spare cash who wants to keep his funds liquid can purchase
‘commercial’ paper which gives him a slightly better return than he would get
on deposit. The markets trade funds held in local currency by local investors
(the domestic market) and funds held outside the issuing country (the
‘eurocurrency’ market. These markets have a different interest rates structure,17
the Eurodollar interest rate being the London Interbank Offer Rate (LIBOR).
2
Capital Markets: trade in longer term debt finance instruments known as
‘bonds’ or ‘debentures’. Borrowers issue bonds, via a dealer, which repay the
holder a specified sum of money on a prescribed maturity date, e.g. in 10
years. Interest is payable by redeeming coupons attached to the bonds and
reflects the credit rating of the issuer (less than BBB are known as ‘high yield
bonds’). In order to make them readily tradable, publicly issued bonds have to
be highly standardized.18 Dealings in off-shore funds are referred to as the
‘Eurobond’ market.
3
Equity Markets: trade in equity shares (also known as securities or stocks).
This allows credit-worthy companies to raise capital by means of a ‘public
offering’ on the stock market. To raise capital in this way a company must
follow regulations (for example, laid down by the SEC in the United States)
and convince the shareholder that the investment will be a good one.19 Issues
are made through an investment bank and the cost of underwriting, legal and
auditing fees is usually about 5 per cent of the sum raised.
Considerable sums of money are traded in the securities markets. In 1996 total
world securities market totalled $13.5 trillion, of which transport accounted for
0.18 per cent.20
To put the annual borrowing of the shipping industry into context, if the total
world capital was US$100, the transport industry, which includes airlines, shipping,
ports, etc. would need to raise 18 cents. Obtaining even such a small sum is not
easy. The job of the markets is to channel funds to where they can be used most
productively. There are many other industries fishing in the same pool so borrowers
must offer a competitive rate of return. Nor is raising money just a matter of
satisfying investors. The markets are highly regulated. To raise capital a shipping
company must achieve recognized standards of ‘credit-worthiness’. Companies
who wish to borrow money in the Money and Capital markets must first obtain a
credit rating. Credit rating agencies such as Standard & Poors and Moodys
THE WORLD FINANCIAL SYSTEM AND TYPES OF FINANCE

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
204
BOX 6.1 Institutions providing or arranging ship finance
Commercial banks. These are the most important source of debt finance for the
bulk shipping industry. Many have dedicated ship finance departments. They offer
term loans of 2–10 years which they finance by borrowing from the capital and
money markets. The short term funding limits the tenor of loans commercial banks
are willing to take on to their balance sheet and most are uncomfortable lending for
more than 5/8 years possibly with a ‘balloon’ (i.e. a proportion of the loan repaid
at the end of the term). Borrowers who want 12 years must look elsewhere such as
ship mortgage banks or leasing companies.
Loans are generally quoted at a margin over LIBOR. Typical spreads range
from 0.5 per cent for an exceptionally strong account to 2 per cent for a more risky
transaction. Sums of more than $50 million are generally syndicated between
several banks (see para below). In addition to loans, banks now offer many
other services, including risk management products, M&A, financial advisory
services, etc.
Ship mortgage banks. In some countries credit is provided by specialist ship
mortgage banks which either obtain their funds in the market or issue bonds which
have tax concessions for local investors (for example, in Germany and Denmark).
In Germany loans may not exceed three-fifths of the value of the ship and 12 years
in tenor.
Investment and merchant banks. These arrange and underwrite finance but
do not generally make loans themselves. They will arrange loan syndications, public
offerings of equity, bond issues in the capital market and the private placement of
debt or equity with financial institutions or private investors. Because so few shipping
companies have the right organizational structure for raising equity and the
associated services, merchant banks who specialize in shipping are comparatively
rare.
Finance houses and brokers. Some financial institutions like GE Capital, Fidelity
Capital etc. which have substantial funds under management have specialist shipping
departments which lend direct to the industry. In addition there are a number of
organizers and brokers of ship finance who specialize in putting together inventive
financing packages.
Leasing companies. These specialize in leasing assets and some will arrange
long-term leasing of ships. In addition, in Japan, leasing companies are significant
lenders. Since they are subject to different regulations they can offer long-term
finance which commercial banks could not take on to their balance sheets.
Shipbuilding credit schemes. Most countries offer shipbuilding credit to domestic
and foreign owners. The terms of export credit are agreed under the OECD
Understanding on Export Credit and currently are set at 80 per cent advance of 8.5
years at 8 per cent per annum interest. With the exception of South Korea this
credit is generally offered in domestic currency. The funds are provided either by a
government bank or a commercial bank which receives a government guarantee
and a subsidy covering the difference between the pricing of the loan and the rate
they borrow at in the local Money Market.

205
regularly monitor the performance of companies and publish a rating of their
credit worthiness. This means that purchasers of bonds and commercial paper
have a guide to the company’s credit worthiness. They look up the issuing company’s
credit rating. In short, the markets act as a sophisticated ‘risk filter’.
The role of financial institutions
To access these markets to borrow or invest, businesses have to work through
intermediaries who provide a range of services (see column 1 of Figure 6.2). The
commercial and mortgage banks borrow in the financial markets and lend on to
shipowners at a profit (‘spread’). In doing this they use their specialist knowledge
to identify those shipping investment opportunities which offer an acceptable risk.
The Merchant banks (known as Investment Banks in the USA) help companies
which have a sufficiently strong credit rating to issue bonds, equity and private
placements. There are at least 200 institutions world-wide who have specialist
expertise in some aspect of ship finance, usually through shipping departments. A
brief description of the main ones and their activities is listed in Box 6.1. In the
following paragraphs we will go through the different ways a shipping company
can raise finance, following the structure set out in Figure 6.3. We start with equity,
then discuss mezzanine finance, senior debt and finally leasing.
6.4 Financing ships with equity
We start with equity. In this case the shipping company is seeking investors who
will take a stake in the company, sharing the risks and receiving the rewards.
Currently there are four main types of financial structure used for raising equity.
These are summarized in Figure 6.3 and include owner equity, limited partnerships,
ship funds and public offerings.
Owner equity and cashflow finance
The first and most obvious way of financing ships is with equity derived from the
owner’s private resources, the earnings of other ships he owns, or possibly direct
investment by close friends or members of the family. Most shipping companies
finance at least part of their activities from internally generated equity, though the
proportion varies enormously.
Public offering of equity
Shipping companies can also raise equity by arranging a public offering on one of
the stock exchanges around the world. New York, Oslo, Hong Kong, Singapore
and Stockholm are all used for public offerings of shipping stock. A prospectus is
drawn up offering shares in the company, to be listed on a specified stock exchange.
FINANCING SHIPS WITH EQUITY

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
206
FIGURE 6.3 Options for financing merchant ships
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

207
For example, in 1993 Bona Shipholding Ltd issued a prospectus offering 11 million
shares at $9 per share, to be listed on the Oslo Stock Exchange from 17 December
1993. Once the issue is made and trading starts, the price is determined by market
supply and demand. By 1996 the Stock in Bona Shipholdings Ltd was trading at
$11.79, so investors had made a ‘paper’ profit of $2.79 per share. The listing of
equity is very important because it gives investors liquidity in the sense that they
can buy or sell shares at any time. For this to work the offering must be big
enough to allow reasonable trading volume.
Public stock issues are handled by investment banks who prepare the prospectus,
submit it to the stock exchange authorities, gain approval for the issue and place
the shares with investors. The whole process takes about 10–15 weeks and costs
about 5 per cent of the funds raised. If enough investors are willing to purchase the
stock at the offer price, the offering is a success. If not, it may be withdrawn.
Successful listings depend on convincing investors that the company is sound.
This in turn depends on their perception of the shipping industry and partly on
whether the company looks well managed. A clear corporate structure, a well defined
strategy, a credible management track record, and plenty of information are helpful.
Raising equity through the stock markets has a mixed history in shipping and
the suitability of this form of finance remains controversial. There are surprisingly
few successful public shipping companies outside the liner trades. Stokes (1992)
thinks that the volatility of the shipping market is one of the fundamental problems,
since ‘the essentially opportunistic nature of the tramp shipowning business
somehow appears incongruous in the context of the stock market, where highly
rated companies are those which are able to achieve consistent profit growth year
after year. Even the liner companies, which conform more to the stock market’s
idea of a reasonably stable investment, have been guilty of sharp swings in
profitability’.21 Possibly the corporate structures expected by the equity markets
are less well suited to exploiting the volatile market. Entrepreneurial flare and
contrarian decision-making can be difficult in a structured corporate environment
where major decisions must wait for a consensus. There are also cultural issues to
consider. The fact that throughout this book the terms ‘shipowner’ and ‘shipping
company’ are used interchangeably says a great deal about the industry’s priorities
in this context. If a shipowner has the skill to become very wealthy, why should he
share his success with equity investors?
Despite these reservations, shipping is a key business in the world economy and
financial institutions have a place in their investment portfolios for the equity of
well-managed transport companies. From this perspective there is no doubt that
the equity markets have a part to play in financing liner, bulk and specialist shipping.
Partnership structures
During the late 1980s substantial amounts of partnership capital were raised through
the Norwegian K/S limited partnerships. It is estimated that during this period
about half of the Norwegian shipping industry operated through K/S companies
and during 1987/9 investors in K/S partnerships committed equity of $3 billion.
FINANCING SHIPS WITH EQUITY

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
208
The K/S partnership, a standard form of Norwegian company, offered investors
tax advantages. The K/S’s were usually set up on a one ship basis with management
subcontracted. The organizer appointed a ‘general partner’ and invited equity
partners to commit capital.22 To obtain the tax advantages, under Norwegian law at
that time, committed equity capital was required to equal 70 per cent of the cost of
the project (i.e. purchase price of the ship plus working capital), of which the
general partner provided 10 per cent.23 At least 20 per cent of the committed capital
had to be available in cash at the time of incorporation and another 20 per cent
within two years. The remainder was only called if needed.
As a rule 80 per cent of the purchase
price was raised as a bank loan and the
remainder with cash drawn against the
committed equity. For example the
purchase of a $10 million ship
requiring $.5 million working capital
might be financed as follows:
For tax purposes the committed
capital could be depreciated at an
annual rate of 25 per cent on a
declining balance basis. In addition provisions could be made for classification
costs, though allowable depreciation could not exceed the total capital committed.24
The K/S shares could be sold and there was a limited market within Norway through
brokers or advertisements in Norwegian newspapers.
In the early 1990s these tax benefits were much reduced and the K/Ss, which
had obtained a mixed reputation after a series of losses, fell out of favour. They
remain a fascinating example of opportunism in ship finance. The speed, flexibility,
and relatively low cost of the K/S system were ideally suited to financing asset
play during the period of escalating ship values in the late 1980s, allowing many
small investors to become involved in shipping. Their weakness, from the investors’
point of view, was the lack of the rigorous regulation which plays such an important
part in protecting investors in the stock market.
‘Ship Funds’ and private placement of equity
A third way of raising equity is by setting up a Ship Fund. A ship fund is an
investment vehicle designed for the specific purpose of allowing equity investors
to invest in merchant ships. The first modern shipping fund was Bulk Transport
which was set up during the tanker depression in 1984/5 to purchase four ULCCs
at prices just above scrap.25 As an investment it proved extremely successful, with
the assets appreciating to five times their purchase cost during the following 4
years. Between 1987 and 1989 a succession of funds were organized by US
commercial and investment banks. In most cases the equity raised has been between
$30 and $50 million, often topped up with 40–60 per cent debt in order to improve
the return to the investor. In total these funds raised about $500 million of equity
capital.
$ million
Mortage loan (80 per cent)
8.00
called equity capital
2.50
Uncalled capital
4.85

209
The procedure for structuring a ship fund is roughly as follows. A registered
company is set up in a tax efficient location (e.g. The Bahamas, Cayman Islands,
etc.) and a general manager is appointed to handle the buying, selling and operating
of the company’s ships. For this service he is paid a management fee—for example
one fund with four ships paid $100,000 plus 1.25 per cent of revenue earned.
Because ship funds are investment vehicles rather than shipping companies, in
most cases the shareholders have the option to wind up the company after 5–7
years, thus ensuring liquidity if the shares prove not to be tradable. To improve the
return to the equity investor, many funds raised debt finance, ranging from 50–75
per cent of the purchase price of the ships. Obviously, the higher the gearing, the
greater the risk/reward ratio for the equity investor.
A prospectus is drawn up setting out the terms on which shares are offered for
sale. This document may range in size from a few pages of typescript to a large
glossy brochure. It sets out the business in which the company is to operate, its
strategy, the market prospects, the terms on which shares can be purchased,
administrative arrangements, control mechanisms and winding up arrangements.
On the basis of this prospectus shares are sold by private placement to wealthy
individuals or institutions, or in a few cases by public offering (see section 5.4).
Investment institutions have limited funds for high risk ventures of this type, so
ship funds depended heavily on wealthy individuals who appreciate a good sales
story—in this case the fact that ships were undervalued. When sufficient funds
have been raised, management purchases ships and operates the company according
to the terms set out in the prospectus.
As a ‘pure’ investment vehicle ship funds face two problems. First, the equity
must be raised before the ships can be purchased, facing the organizers with the
difficult task of finding good quality ships at very short notice. Second, their
commercial and management structure is ambiguous. They are not shipping
companies because they have a limited life, but they are charged with running
ships over a fairly long period. Both these problems arise from the perception of
ships as commodities. Although ships are traded on the sale and purchase market
as commodities, in terms of ongoing management they are complex engineering
structures. Efforts to ‘package’ them as commodities brought a whole range of
risks which neither the organizers nor the investors in ship funds had anticipated.
Only two or three of the ship funds produced a commercial return for investors.
Mezzanine finance structures
Between debt and equity there is a half-way house which is known as Mezzanine
Finance. This is a loosely defined term which usually refers to high yielding debt,
typically priced at several percentage points above LIBOR, often with some form
of equity ‘Kicker’ attached—for example equity warrants. One such structure
involved $40 million of senior debt, topped by $26 million of Mezzanine finance
in the form of cumulative participating preference shares. These preference shares,
redeemable after five years, paid a basic 10 per cent per annum dividend plus an
additional 20 per cent of cashflow after interest and principal repayment. They
FINANCING SHIPS WITH EQUITY

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
210
also included detachable 5-year warrants for 25 per cent of the company at original
cost. Despite the apparent generosity of this offer it was never placed and the
company resorted to more conventional financing. Mezzanine has not been widely
used in shipping and is not easy to place.
6.5 Financing ships with debt
Debt has been the favoured way of financing shipping in the last 30 years. It is
attractive to borrowers as a flexible way of financing a shipping company, while
retaining fall ownership of the business. There are four types of debt structure:
bonds, commercial bank loans, shipyard credit and private placements.
Bonds and fixed term securities
As already mentioned, borrowers with an acceptable credit rating can raise money
by issuing bonds in the capital market. First the company must obtain a credit
rating from Moodys or Standard and Poors (see the discussion of capital markets
above). The rating awarded determines whether the bonds can be issued at all and
the level of interest. Although there are no clear guidelines, the requirement is for
a credit rating, a sound management team with a good track record, a clear corporate
structure which analysts can understand and a convincing strategy. An investment
bank handles the deal, drawing up the offer document and handling the placement.
A list of shipping companies which have used this method of raising finance, as
shown in Table 6.1. The sums involved were $1–200 million and are all ‘high
yield’ rather than ‘investment grade’ issues. The procedure is relatively time-
consuming, taking several months to develop a prospectus and place the bonds in
the market.
TABLE 6.1 Companies raising high yield debt
Source: Hayalidis & Cotsoradis (1995) High Yield Debt as a Source of Capital for Shipping
Companies

211
Commercial bank loans
By far the most common way of financing ships and shipping companies is the
term loan. There are at least twenty major banks who consistently offer ship finance
and have dedicated shipping departments, though sometimes the number swells to
over a hundred. The procedure for raising a shipping loan is relatively simple. The
shipowner or shipping company approaches a shipping bank and explains his
requirements. If, after reviewing the case, the bank officer feels that the bank may
be interested in making a loan, he draws up a proposal, discusses it with the borrower
and negotiates any points which are not acceptable. The five key aspects of a
shipping loan are the tenor (i.e. the period of the loan, 5 years, 7 years, etc.);
interest rate (loans are generally made at a fixed spread over the bank’s funding
cost, e.g. the London Inter Bank Offer Rate, LIBOR); fees (the charges for arranging
and administering the loan); collateral (the assets or funds to which the bank has
legal access if the borrower defaults); and the covenants (the security conditions
imposed by the lender setting out the conditions that the owner must satisfy and
the rights of the bank if he defaults). A more detailed definition of some of the
terms and concepts discussed in this section is shown in Box 6.2. Negotiating
these terms is, of course, the most important part of the lending process.
Before the loan can be made it must be approved by the bank’s credit system.
For a client well known to the bank, this will only take a few days, but difficult or
risky loans obtaining credit approval can be a lengthy process. The job of the
credit officers is to judge whether the borrower will be able to service the loan in
all foreseeable circumstances and to ensure that sufficient security is available to
compensate the bank if he defaults. Cashflow projections will be prepared to allow
the credit officers to review debt service. If a time charter is available, this part of
the analysis is greatly simplified, provided the bank is convinced that the charterer
is sound. A valuation of the ship is obtained to establish its current market value,
and the value of other security is reviewed, along with the covenants which ensure
that the bank has a degree of legal control if things start to go wrong. Sometimes
the bank credit committee will ask for the terms to be revised and this will need to
be agreed with the borrower. When approval is obtained a closing is arranged at
which the papers are signed and the funds transferred. Repayment then proceeds
in accordance with the loan agreement, generally at six-monthly intervals.
When structuring the loan, the usual practice for an owner is to establish a one
ship company for each vessel financed and assign the first mortgage on the ship to
the lender as security.26 This structure, which has been standard practice over the
last 20 or 30 years, lies at the heart of ship finance as a specialist sector of banking.
By creating a stand-alone company in an acceptable legal jurisdiction (e.g. Liberia),
legal access to the ship’s earnings and insurances is assured and the ship becomes
immune from arrest for claims against other ships in the borrower’s fleet. This is
important because shipowners are often secretive and the banker may not feel
confident that he can keep track of his business activities. It also means that the
bank is lending to a company with no assets other than the ship and its earnings, so
security becomes a crucial issue in structuring the loan. First, the banker must
decide what proportion of the ship’s current market value can safely be advanced.
FINANCING SHIPS WITH DEBT

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
212
1
Tenor: The length of the loan. The loan may be offered for anything from 3 to 15
years, depending on circumstances.
2
Gearing: The ratio of the loan to the asset value (e.g. ship value). Varies from
40–80 per cent depending on the ship type, employment, collateral, age,
competition from other banks and general lending policy. Unless exceptionally
well secured, loans of more than 50 per cent can be regarded as containing a
‘neo-equity’ component.
3
Repayment schedule: Usually equal instalments over the period of the loan. In
the London or Eurodollar market, instalments are usually every six months. If lending
policy does not allow a loan over a sufficient period of time necessary for the
vessel to repay its debt, a ‘balloon’ repayment may be used as a way of keeping
annual principal repayments to a manageable level. For example, a newbuilding
might be paid off over 8 years, but with a 30 per cent ‘balloon’ payment at the
end. This reflects the banker’s confidence that the ship will have a significant asset
value at the end of its tenor. For older vessels the balloon is often related to the
predicted scrap value.
4
Currency: Most commercial banks lend in Dollars. However, credit provided by
shipyards may be in the domestic currency—for example, Yen, Pounds Sterling,
Deutschmarks, etc. This presents the borrower with a major currency risk which
must often be hedged against.
5
Interest rates: Most financing by commercial banks is done on a floating rate
basis. Two exceptions are the ship mortgage banks (primarily German) and
government subsidized interest rate schemes. In the former, the banks fund
themselves through the issues of ship mortgage bonds, while in the latter, the
financing bank is usually paid the difference between the fixed rate to the agencies.
Commercial banks generally lend at a spread over the rate at which they borrow,
six month LIBOR being the most common. Typical spreads range from 0.5 per cent
to 2.0 per cent, according to the standing of the borrower, maturity, etc.
6
Fees: Where a standby period or an extensive drawdown period is involved, the
bank will customarily charge the borrower a commitment fee of about 0.5 per
cent per annum on the unused portion of the commitment. In certain circumstances,
a management fee or arrangement fee of up to 1 per cent is charged as a front-
end payment, to cover the costs of processing and administering a complex
transaction or where syndication is involved.
7
Syndication of shipping loans: May be used to spread the risk of a large
loan among several participating banks. One bank leads the syndicate and others
participate.
8
Interest rates and currency hedging: To reduce risk, interest rates can be
fixed, capped (i.e. subjected to a ceiling) or even inverted. Currencies can be
hedged forward by using swaps, options or even compound options. These
techniques enable the borrower to remove much of the risk of currency and interest
rate fluctuation from the finance.
9
Security: The security sought against the loan may include the following: a first
mortgage on the ship financed, mortgages on other ships, assignment of time
charter earnings and other assignment of insurances, a corporate guarantee or a
personal guarantee of the shipowner.
10 Covenants: The documentation of the financial agreement will generally include
a range of covenants, some of which may be major issues in the negotiation.
These covenants may include the provision of regular financial information,
maintenance of working capital and net worth, and a minimum value clause
which requires additional collateral to be provided if the value of the asset falls
below a certain multiple of the amount owed.
11 Documentation: The documentation will be tailored to fit each case, and contains
details of the loan interest rate, repayment terms, fees, prepayment conditions.
The collateral is described in detail and if charter money is being assigned, the
arrangement is spelled out in detail.
BOX 6.2 Eleven key points in a commercial ‘term loan’ facility

213
This will depend on the age of the ship and the state of the market. Some bankers
consider that the loan should not exceed 50 per cent of the market value of the
vessel unless additional security is available. With a time charter, mortgages on
other ships, a personal guarantee from the owner, or a history of successful business
with the owner, the advance may be increased to 60–80 per cent. In some exceptional
circumstances bankers may lend 100 per cent. However there are no firm rules.
Banking, like shipping, is a competitive market. If another bank offers 80 per cent
against a first mortgage, that is the market rate. A credit judgement must be made
on whether the risk is acceptable. It is here that the real skill of ship finance lies.
This credit judgement is also reflected in the interest rate on the loan. Spreads
(i.e. the margin over the bank’s borrowing rate) vary from 0.5 per cent and 2 per
cent per annum over LIBOR, depending on the borrower and the banking market.
This spread has to cover the bank’s overheads, administrative expenses, return on
equity and any losses on loans which are not repaid. The covenants will probably
include a requirement that the borrower maintains the collateral at a certain ratio to
the loan, say 150 per cent (the ‘minimum value clause’). If the value of the ship
falls below this level the borrower will be expected to provide additional collateral.
There will also be covenants assigning insurance to the banker and probably others
placing restrictions on the movement of funds and the payment of dividends.
For large shipping companies, borrowing against individual ships is inconvenient
because any change in the fleet involves a time-consuming loan transaction. For
this reason companies with well defined corporate structures often prefer to borrow
as a company, using their corporate balance sheet as collateral. Most liner companies
and a few bulk shipping companies are able to access this type of finance. Sealand,
APL, Mitsui OSK, OSG, OMI, Bergesen, A.P.Moller, Stolt Neilsen and Argonaut
are names that come to mind. For example in 1996 Bergesen AS, a Norwegian
company with forty-five tankers, borrowed $500 million over 7 years, at a pricing
of twenty basis points in the first 5 years.27 The loan was secured against the company
balance sheet and structured as a revolving credit, allowing them to draw on the
loan up to the limit as required by the business. Large loans are almost always
syndicated among several banks and usually incorporate covenants to ensure that
the company maintains a strong balance sheet. Typically these covenants cover the
leverage rate, the earnings to interest ratio and the asset cover.
Loan syndications and asset sales
Lenders like to diversify their risk and are generally unwilling to keep more than,
say, $25–50 million of a particular transaction on their books. For larger loans the
usual practice is to spread the risk by sharing the loan among a syndication of
several banks. Asset ‘distribution’, as this is known, is thus used to split large loans
into small packages which can be distributed around many banks. In addition to
spreading the risk, it allows banks without the expertise to appraise shipping loans
to participate in the business under the guidance of a lead bank who does.
Setting up a syndication for a large shipping loan of, say, $200 million is a
complex task. In addition to the normal credit appraisal process, the lead bank
FINANCING SHIPS WITH DEBT

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
214
must manage the relationship with the borrower, whilst organizing a syndicate of
banks to provide the loan. The simplest way to explain the process is to work
through an example of a typical syndication timetable, focusing on the key areas.
The main items are as follows:
1
Getting a mandate. First the lead bank meets the client to discuss his financing
needs. For example a loan of $500 million might be required to finance a
newbuilding programme. The bank’s syndication department will be consulted
about the terms on which the loan could be syndicated to other banks and
unofficial enquiries will be made to discover how difficult the loan will be to
place and what particular features in terms of pricing, etc. will be necessary. If
the bankers are sure the loan can be placed they will offer to underwrite it.
Otherwise the offer will be on a ‘best efforts’ basis. When the client is satisfied
with the terms and conditions, he will issue a mandate letter.
2
Preparation for syndication. Next, documentation is prepared and the whole
package is agreed with the client. Again this is a complex exercise involving
the Syndications Department, the Shipping Department and the bank’s Credit
Control officers. It also requires skills in drafting documentation and preparing
an Information Memorandum designed to answer the questions likely to be
raised by participating banks.
3
Syndicating the loan. When the preparations are complete the terms will be
circulated to those banks which the Syndication Department believes may be
interested in participating. For a specialized business like shipping the list may
extend to 20 or 30 banks who will be asked to respond by a given date, indicating
their interest. In the meantime the lead bank will visit interested banks to discuss
the proposal and the participating banks carry out their own enquiries, since
they will have to process the loan through their own credit control system. Those
banks who are prepared to participate will indicate the sum they are willing to
take and when sufficient commitments have been obtained a closing is arranged
at which all banks and the owner sign the necessary documents.
4
Administration, fees, etc. The loan documentation sets out the procedures for
administering the loan. As a rule the lead bank acts as agent and charges a fee
for doing so. For large syndications a management group may be set up. Their
task is to handle ongoing problems without the necessity for approaching every
participant. The pricing of the loan and the split of fees, etc. between the lead
bank and participants will form a key part of the offer documentation.
The time taken to arrange a syndication depends on its complexity. Some loans
can be placed very quickly because they are readily acceptable in the market. Others
may require many months to line up the full subscription. Obviously one problem
to be faced is that the shipowner may not be in a position to wait many months.
Widely syndicated shipping loans can sometimes be difficult to manage. If the
borrower runs into difficulties, the lead bank and management group may find it
difficult to control a diverse group of participating banks, some of whom know
nothing about the shipping market and its cycles. This makes borrowers
uncomfortable and it is often argued that it is better if syndication is restricted to

215
club deals between banks who combine to offer joint financing. For example five
banks may join to finance a $150 million newbuilding programme, each taking
$30 million.
Asset sales (Participation Agreement)
A third form of ‘distribution’ commonly used by banks is asset sales. The bank
goes ahead and books the loan in the normal way, placing it on its balance sheet.
For example, it may lend $50 million to a shipowner to purchase an $80 million
tanker. If at some later date the bank decides to reduce its exposure to shipping
risk, it may sell the loan to another bank which has room on its balance sheet for
shipping risk. Large banks have an Asset Sales Department which arranges the
sale of loans. The bank officer in the Asset Sales Department approaches banks
that he knows are interested in taking shipping loans. When a buyer has been
found the two banks sign a joint participation agreement, transferring a specified
proportion of the loan, say $5 million to the buyer, on agreed terms of interest and
capital repayment. Naturally the bank which booked the loan will aim to sell it on
favourable terms, retaining a margin for itself. The originating bank will continue
to manage the loan in the normal way. In some cases the shipowner may not even
be aware that his loan is now held by another bank.
Private placement of debt
Instead of borrowing from a bank it may be possible to arrange a private placement
of debt with a pension fund, insurance company or leasing company. Since this
involves a one-off deal it can be expensive, but well structured and credit-worthy
companies with a good story to tell can achieve good results. Stolt Neilsen placed
$100 million debt by this method in the US in 1989. The placement was arranged
by Furman Selz and involved fixed interest notes. In April, 1991 a second placement
was made of $175 million unsecured fixed interest notes.28 The advantages of this
form of finance are the fixed interest rate, long tenor and the corporate obligation
which leaves individual assets unencumbered.
6.6 Finance for newbuildings
Now we come to debt finance for newbuildings. Although the principles of financing
a new ship are generally the same as for second-hand ships, there are two additional
problems to overcome. First, the capital cost of a new ship is generally too high
relative to its likely spot market earnings to be financed from cashflow, especially
if the loan is amortized over the short periods of 5–8 years favoured by commercial
banks. Unless a time charter is available, arranging security can be difficult,
especially if a one-ship company structure is used. Second, the finance is needed
before the ship is built, so there is a period before delivery when part of the loan is
drawn but the hull is not available as collateral.
Because these problems make it difficult to raise newbuilding finance from
commercial banks, especially during recessions when shipyards are keen to win
FINANCE FOR NEWBUILDINGS

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
216
orders, there is a long tradition of shipbuilders offering finance to their customers,
often with the support of their governments. This practice stretches back to the 1930s,
but the modern shipbuilding credit regime developed in the 1960s. In 1962 the
Japanese shipyards took the first step by launching an export credit scheme offering
customers 80 per cent over 8 years at 5½ per cent interest. This started a period of
fierce credit competition between Japanese and European shipyards, leading
eventually to the OECD Understanding on Export Credit for Ships in 1969 (see chapter
13) in an effort to regulate intercountry competition shipbuilding credit terms.
The OECD Understanding is a ‘gentleman’s agreement’ which sets out the most
favourable terms a signatory government is entitled to offer on a shipbuilding credit.
It defines a ‘ship’ as any seagoing vessel of 100 grt and above used for the
transportation of goods or persons, or for the performance of a specialized service
(for example fishing, icebreakers, dredgers, etc.). In 1995 the terms were 80 per
cent loan over 8 years at 8.5 per cent interest. However the terms vary. Japan offers
export finance in Yen through the EXIM bank on OECD terms. South Korea provides
through the KO-EXIM bank. Terms on offer are up to 68 per cent of the purchase
price at 8 per cent per annum interest amortized over 8.5 years after a two-year
holiday. Loans are generally in dollars and a first class bank guarantee is required.
Most European shipyards offer OECD terms, though with some local variations
for domestic customers.
In the 1990s this long established practice is under pressure along with other
shipyard subsidies. At the same time commercial bankers have become much more
sophisticated in structuring shipyard finance. A shipowner may accept the
shipbuilding credit, but ask a commercial bank to enhance it by extending the
repayment period, capitalizing the interest rate subsidy through a SWAP, converting
the fixed rate interest to floating rate or converting the whole loan into Dollars
rather than the domestic shipbuilding currency. Any of these transformations are
easily achievable by a sophisticated shipping bank.
Pre-delivery finance can sometimes be a problem. Shipyards generally require
their customers to make ‘stage payments’ to the shipyard on a sufficient scale to
pay for the material and labour required to build the ship. This generally involves
a down payment to the builder for the purchase of materials on signing the contract,
with the balance being paid in roughly equal instalments on keel laying, engine
delivery, launching and delivery (see Chapter 3, section 3.5 for a discussion of this
practice).
The pattern of stage payments is negotiable. If pre-delivery credit has been
arranged, the purchaser meets the first payment from his own equity and the bank
pays the remaining stage payments. The risk for the lender is that stage payments
are made, but the ship is not completed, either because the shipyard goes bankrupt
with a partly finished ship in the yard, or there is some form of civil or political
disturbance which prevents completion or delivery. With no ship to act as collateral,
some other form of security has to be found. In most cases stage payments are
covered by a ‘refund guarantee’ issued by the shipyard’s bank. However, problems
may arise when dealing with shipyards where bankruptcy is a risk, or are located
in politically unstable areas. This is where a government guarantee is particularly
valuable, or possibly the purchaser can arrange political risk insurance.

217
Post-delivery finance is generally drawn on delivery of the vessel. It may be
obtained from three sources, a Shipyard Credit Scheme, Commercial Bank Credit
or leasing. Bank credit and leasing are discussed elsewhere, so here we will focus
on the shipbuilding credit schemes. There are three ways in which governments
may intervene to make shipbuilding credit more attractive to the shipowner than
commercial bank credit, they are:
1
Government guarantee. By obtaining a Government guarantee of the loan the
shipowner may be able to raise credit with a commercial bank. The value of
this guarantee to the borrower depends on the credit standards which the
government agency applies in issuing the guarantee. Sometimes the standards
are the same as those applied by commercial banks, so the guarantee has little
value. If, however, the government is keen to help the shipyard win the order,
it may be prepared to guarantee credit terms which the owner would otherwise
have no hope of obtaining from a commercial bank. In doing this the
government takes a credit risk, which is in effect a subsidy.
2
Interest rates subsidy. Some government agencies offer subsidized interest. For
example, in the UK a loan is raised from a UK commercial bank, which receives
an interest rate make-up from the Government to cover the difference between
the agreed rate on the loan (i.e. 8 per cent) and the current market rate.
3
Moratorium. In difficult circumstances the Government may agree to a one or
two year moratorium on interest or principal repayments.
Governments have different ways of handling shipyard credit. In some cases there
is a government bank which carries out credit analysis and makes the loan. For
example, the Export Credit Bank of Japan carries out this function. Other
governments have an agency which performs the credit analysis, but the loan is
provided by local commercial banks. For example, the Export Credit Guarantee
department in the UK performs in this way.
6.7 Leasing ships
Finally we come to leasing ships. This is a device originally developed in the
property business where land and buildings are very commonly leased. Essentially
the owner of the property (the lessor) hands it over to the lessee who, in return for
a rental stream, is free to use it as though it were his own. At the end of the lease the
property reverts to the lessor. This technique is widely used for leasing mechanical
equipment with a long working life, including ships. In transactions of this sort
there are three main risks to consider, the revenue risk (will the lessor be paid in
full for the asset he has purchased), the operating risk (who will pay if it breaks
down?) and the residual value risk (who gets the benefit if it goes up in value?).
The two common types of leasing structures, the operating lease and the finance
lease, deal with these risks in different ways. The operating lease, which is widely
used for hiring equipment and consumer durables, is generally a rather short-term
arrangement which leaves most of the risk to the lessor. The lease can usually be
terminated at the lessee’s discretion, maintenance is carried out by the lessor and
LEASING SHIPS

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
218
at the end of the lease the equipment reverts to the lessor. Finance leases are
generally longer, covering a substantial part of the assets’s life. The lessor, whose
main role is as financier, has little involvement with the asset beyond ownership.
All operating responsibilities fall on the lessee who, in the event of early termination,
must fully compensate the lessor.
Shipping leases usually fall into the second category because finance leases
often bring a tax benefit. Governments in some countries encourage investment by
providing tax incentives such as accelerated depreciation. Companies with high
profits but no suitable investment of their own can obtain tax relief by purchasing
a ship which they lease to a shipowner who operates the ship as his own until the
end of the lease. The lessor does not have to get his hands dirty, but, hopefully, he
collects a tax benefit some of which is passed on to the lessee. Obviously this
depends on the good will of the tax authorities.
A simple lease structure is shown in Figure 6.4. The ship, built to the lessee’s
specification, is purchased by the company providing the finance (the lessor)—a
bank, large corporation or insurance company—and leased under a long-term
agreement (e.g. a bare boat charter) to the shipping company (lessee). The lease
gives the shipping company (the lessee) complete control to operate the asset but
leaves the ownership vested in the finance company who can obtain tax benefits by
depreciating the ship against profits. Some of this benefit is passed on to the operator
in lower rent (charter) payments. A variant is the leverage lease which raises most
of the cost of the ship in bank debt (e.g. 90 per cent) and the lessor buys the equity at
a price which reflects the tax benefits he gets from depreciating the whole ship.
This type of finance has several advantages. It provides funding for longer periods
than is available from commercial banks, possibly as much as 15 years or even 25
years. Capital costs are reduced to the extent that any tax benefits are reflected in
the charter back arrangement and since the
company does not actually purchase the ship, the
liability does not appear on the balance sheet,
though nowadays there is generally a requirement
for published accounts to reveal such liabilities.
There are several drawbacks. The lessor, who
usually has no interest in the ship, must be
satisfied that the lessee will meet its obligations
under the lease. Only financially sound shipping
companies are likely to qualify. The lessee is
tied into a long-term transaction. If he decides
to sell the ship he must go through the complex
business of unwinding the lease. Another
problem is that, since tax laws may change, the
tax benefit is never quite certain and this must
be covered in the documentation. With so many
eventualities to cover, the paperwork on leasing
transactions can be prodigious. For this reason
leasing works best where there is a well defined long-term requirement for the ship
and a well established shipping corporate.
FIGURE 6.4 Leasing structure
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

219
6.8 Appraising risk on shipping investment
Throughout this chapter we have repeatedly referred to the evaluation of credit
risk in the shipping market. In chapter 2 we discussed shipping risk in terms of the
shipping cycle and drew attention to the history of generally low returns compared
with other forms of investment. Now it is appropriate to say something more about
the risks involved. The risk of an investment is usually measured by the standard
deviation of the year-on-year return, since this gives an indication of the variability
of the return.29 In these terms shipping is a high risk industry with a standard
deviation of bulk shipping revenues roughly twice as high as the US stock market
(see Table 2.5).
A good starting point is to divide the risk faced by a shipping company and its
bankers into three parts. Economic risk occurs because shipping companies are
exposed to a world economy which is itself extremely volatile and risky. All
industries face this risk to some extent, but we saw in our discussion of the shipping
market model in chapter 4 that ship demand is particularly closely linked to the
world industrial economy The two deep recessions which hit the shipping market
in the 1970s and 1980s were partly caused by recession in the world economy.
Other capital goods industries encountered much the same problems. Operating
risk arises from the performance of the ship and the shipping company which
manages it. The most common problem here is that the ship or fleet are in poor
condition and break down frequently or need large amounts of unplanned
maintenance. Finally there is shipping market risk, the risk specific to the shipping
industry itself, particularly the market cycle. As we have seen, the shape of each
cycle is uniquely moulded by supply side factors. Over-ordering of ships by
shipowners; over capacity in shipbuilding or any of the other factors which uniquely
affect the shipping industry, are risks which must be taken into account in the
credit appraisal.
It is with the shipping risk that we are particularly concerned in this book. This
risk, which often seems to arise from the lack of foresight and market discipline by
shipowners, lies at the heart of the shipping business. It poses a particular problem
because any view of the future depends on the expectation of whether past mistakes
will be repeated. If shipowners become wiser and better informed, it is a small step
to the expectation that past mistakes will not be repeated in future, making shipping
less cyclical. Readers of previous chapters in this book know that this view misses
the point of shipping cycles. Shipping cycles have a purpose. The shipping market
uses them to control supply and demand in an unpredictable world. From this
perspective the guiding light for financiers is ‘know the enemy’. Each shipping
cycle, like each shipowner client, has its own character. Shipping banks place great
value on ‘name lending’, in which they get to know and trust the clients they lend
to. It is a logical step to apply the same principle to shipping cycles. Just as familiarity
with the client reduces risk, so does familiarity with shipping cycles. As they progress
through each cycle, lenders (and investors) must ask ‘what is its character?’ ‘Is it
trustworthy?’ This approach leads to an understanding of the unique character of
each cycle as it unfolds, and an opinion on how risky that particular cycle really is.
Sometimes the opinion will be wrong—it happens with people as well.
APPRAISING RISK ON SHIPPING INVESTMENT

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
220
Implications of volatility for portfolio management
The implication of the shipping volatility for bankers is rather substantial. It has
been the tradition in recent years for large banks to set up shipping departments
which operate large portfolios of shipping assets—$3–5 billion was by no means
exceptional in the 1980s. Whilst this is an understandable response to an industry
which clearly requires specialist skills, it is precisely the opposite of the strategy
adopted by investment managers in handling high volatility shares. The accepted
practice is to use a well-diversified portfolio of high risk shares to remove the
‘unique risk’ attached to individual shares.
The strategy of consolidating shipping assets in a single portfolio leaves the
management of the ‘shipping division’ with the problem of managing a portfolio
whose main source of security, the ship itself, is both volatile and highly correlated.
If we accept the close correlation between the prices of different types of ships
discussed in chapter 3, then the management of the portfolio will sometimes be
extremely difficult. The ship banking executive with a large portfolio of assets
whose collateral sudden halves in value is immediately at a disadvantage within
the bank, unless the corporate policy has been set up in advance to accommodate
often large and often prolonged fluctuations in the return on investments.
One solution is the wider distribution of shipping assets discussed in section
6.5. Asset distribution has the advantage that the concentration of shipping assets
in the bank’s balance sheet is greatly diluted, removing them from the focus of
corporate attention. Portfolio theory is the way that the equity market deals with
high risk stocks, and exactly the same principals apply in shipping.
6.9 Ship finance and shipping market dynamics
Finally we should say something about the way the activities of bankers feeds
back into the shipping market. In Chapter 4 we likened the mechanism which
drives investment in the shipping market to a switchbox directing cash between
the four shipping markets. During cyclical upswings cash is sucked into the market
and increasing liquidity encourages shipowners to order new ships. As these vessels
are delivered supply overtakes demand, freight rates fall and cash is pumped out of
the market, forcing owners to sell ships for scrap in order to raise funds.
Banks play an important part in the ‘pumping’ process. Figure 6.5 which is a
development of Figure 3.1, shows the cash flows which underlie this market
mechanism. The focus of the diagram is the circle showing the shipping cash flow,
with net payments into the shipping industry’s bank account shown by the square-
hatched bars and payments out by the black bars. As before there are four markets
involved, each of which plays an important part in the ‘financial pumping’
mechanism. However we have now introduced shipping banks who are prepared
to lend on new and second-hand transactions. They are shown in the centre of the
diagram. Their loans to second-hand buyers are shown as a square-hatched bar
because the cash they advance is paid to a shipowner. However loans on
newbuildings are shown in black because the money is, in effect, paid to the
shipbuilder and does not become part of the shipping industry’s cashflow. It does,

221
FIGURE 6.5 Cashflow model of the shipping market
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
Note: This diagram shows the cashflow in the shipping market. It involves three markets, the
freight market, the sales and purchase market and the newbuilding market. Note that cash
invested in newbuildings flows out of the industry, while the main inflows come from freight
earnings, bank loans and scrap
SHIP FINANCE AND SHIPPING MARKET DYNAMICS

FINANCING SHIPS AND SHIPPING COMPANIES
222
however, result in the debt service cashflow, also shown in black. In addition to
banks we have equity investors who are located at the top right of the diagram.
Cash flows in as equity and out as dividends.
The ability of the ship finance industry to reschedule cashflows is of great interest
when it is taken in conjunction with the cyclical nature of the business. Cash paid
to the newbuilding market is shown in black because money spent on new ships
leaves the shipping industry. The full price of the ship is paid to the shipyard,
which then pays it out as materials, labour and profit. This is where ship finance
becomes important. If the ship is bought from equity, the cash outflow is immediate,
but if it is bought with a loan, the outflow is spread over the period of the period of
loan repayment. This has two consequences. First, newbuilding contracts placed at
the top of the market commit investors to cash payments at a later date when market
conditions will have changed. Second, the availability of debt finance ‘multiplies’
the ordering capacity of the industry for a given equity level. For example, if the
bulk shipping industry is holding liquid assets worth $10 billion and there is no
leverage, it can order 100 VLCCs at $100 million each. If 80 per cent credit is
available the industry can order 500 VLCCs. This does not mean that it will order
500 VLCCs, or that bankers would agree to so many loans, but the opportunity is
there. On both accounts the amount of newbuilding during a cyclical peak and the
way it is financed has consequences for the recession which our study of cycles in
Chapter 2 suggests is likely to follow.
Lending on second-hand ships plays a different part in market dynamics. A
secondhand sale just transfers cash from one shipping bank account to another.
The industry cash balance is unchanged so the cashflows in Figure 6.5 are shown
as hatched bars. Or at least that is the case if there is no bank lending. If purchasers
borrow, the short-term liquidity of the shipping industry increases. For example, if
an owner borrows $6 million to buy a $10 million tanker the industry’s cash balance
increases by $6 million If we look at the industry balance sheet as a whole, the
effects of this sale and purchase transaction is to increase the current assets by $6
million, offset by a liability of $6 million.
It is easy to see how the availability of debt finance accentuates the cash pumping
effect of the market. In a rising freight market the sale and purchase of ships at
increasing prices pumps cash into the industry balance sheet. The industry becomes
more and more liquid, allowing owners to pay ever higher prices for ships, which
eventually spills over into the newbuilding market. At the same time highly leveraged
owners are building up liabilities and their break-even cash flow, including debt
service, is increasing. As the market moves into the downswing the whole process
is reversed. The volume of second-hand activity reduces as prices fall and the cash
inflow from banks drops sharply, just as the cash injection from freight rates shrinks.
Those owners who built up balance sheet liabilities at the top of the cycle now find
that the incoming cash flow is inadequate to meet their day-to-day obligations.
They are forced to sell ships on the second-hand market. This is the point at which
the asset play market starts for those shipowners with strong balance sheets, or
external investors. Buying ships cheap in recessions is one of the ways that
shipowners top up the poor returns from carrying cargo. Some of the best bargains
are to be had when bankers foreclose and force distress sales. In the right hands

223
ship finance is a valuable service which spreads the substantial cash cost of
investment in ships over a period of time. For bankers, the trick is to back the
winners.
6.10 Summary
In this chapter we have discussed how the shipping industry finances its massive
requirement for capital in a business which is volatile and historically has offered
low returns. We started by reviewing the history of ship finance. This revealed that
the type of finance available to the shipping industry has gone through distinct
phases. As the world economy grew in the 1950s and 1960s there was a long phase
of charter-backed investment, mainly initiated by the shippers. This was followed
by new forms of assetbacked finance during the very volatile markets of the 1980s,
notably ship funds and K/S companies. Finally, in the 1990s, shipping companies
have shown more interest in corporate structures, with public offerings and corporate
lending.
The money to finance ships comes from the pool of savings which are mainly
held in three markets, the money markets (short term debt), the capital markets
(long-term debt) and the stock market (equity). Nowadays most of the investment
is carried out by institutions such as pension funds and insurance companies, though
there are a few private investors. Accessing these financial markets can be done
directly by the shipping company, or indirectly through an intermediary such as a
commercial bank. Direct access requires well defined corporate structures which
are less widely used in shipping than elsewhere. Shipping has traditionally relied
heavily on bank debt, particularly bulk shipping.
There are four different financial structures which can be adopted for raising
ship finance, equity, mezzanine finance, debt and leasing. In recent years the
shipping industry has experimented with raising equity through ship funds, K/S
partnerships and public offerings. The sums of money raised are small relative to
the industry’s total requirements. Mezzanine finance, a half way house between
debt and equity, is even more rare. Debt, the most widely used form of ship finance,
is available in several forms. Bonds have attractions, but are restricted to shipping
companies able to obtain a credit rating to issue them. Commercial bank loans are
by far the most popular form of finance. There are more than 100 banks offering
loans for ship purchase. For large loans a syndication will be arranged. Shipyard
finance is a widely used way of financing new ships, since it addresses the difficult
question of the pre-delivery guarantee, and credit terms are often subsidized. Finally,
leasing offers the opportunity to reduce finance costs by transferring ownership of
the vessel to a company which can use its depreciation to obtain a tax break.
The conclusion must be that ship finance, like everything else in shipping, moves
with the times. Each phase in the industry’s history has its own character. The
common theme which runs through each period is the shipping cycle.
SUMMARY

