225
Chapter 7
The economic
principles of maritime
trade
A kingdom, that has a large import and export, must abound more with
industry, and that employed upon delicacies and luxuries, than a kingdom
that rests contented with its native commodities. It is, therefore, more
powerful as well as richer and happier
(David Hume, Essay of Commerce, 1752)
Chapter 7

THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF MARITIME TRADE
226
7.1 Why study seaborne trade?
Sea trade is one of the great economic success stories of the last 50 years. Between
1950 to 1995 it grew from 0.55 bt to 4.3 bt, making shipping one of the fastest
growing sectors of the post-war economy. Although this trend looks simple, it
conceals a trading world seething with change. The growth path was irregular.
Trade grew rapidly in the 1950s and 1960s, but there were two deep recessions in
the 1970s and 1980s. Regional trade was constantly on the move. Two of the biggest
trading regions, Western Europe and Japan, went through a cycle of growth until
the early 1970s and stagnation for the next two decades. New high growth economies
emerged in other areas, notably Asia and North America. The commodities trade
changed. Some trades grew rapidly, many stagnated and some declined. A few
new trades such as steam coal appeared and others like asbestos disappeared.
Businesses with a long-term commitment to sea transport need to understanding
these changes. Liner companies planning new services, shipowners specializing in
industrial shipping, shipbuilders planning capacity, and bankers financing fleet
expansion all have an interest in understanding why trade changes. Shipping is
derived demand, so we must delve into the world economy for the explanation.
There are several different ways in which we can analyse trade. First there is
trade by country. We can study why countries trade and how their trade fits in with
the growth of their economies. Second, we can look at trade from a geographical
viewpoint and study the regional distribution of maritime trade and the trade flows
between the trading regions of the world. Third, we can view trade as a collection
of commodities such as iron ore, coal, oil, etc. and study the economic characteristics
of each commodity. In this chapter we are mainly concerned with the country
structure of trade. In chapter 8 we look at regional trade and in chapter 9 we study
commodity trade economics as part of our analysis of bulk shipping.
7.2 The countries that trade by sea
Although countries are very diverse there are compelling reasons for selecting the
nation state as the basic unit for analysing sea trade. It is the obvious economic and
political unit with common policies, separated from other countries by their
currency. Government policy affects free trade, tariffs and even the participation in
trade. These policies can be very important. Many countries have restrictive trade
policies such as tariffs. In the fifteenth century the Chinese introduced laws
prohibiting sea trade. More recently the policies of the European Union (EU) have
had a significant impact on the size and direction of trade. There are many other
examples. Even if these reasons are not persuasive, the fact that most trade statistics
are collected by governments on a national basis is a practical reason why we
should analyse trade in this way.
There are currently about 100 countries which trade by sea. If every single
country is included, down to the smallest Pacific island, there are many more,
possibly as many as 170. However we are concerned with the larger countries
whose trade exceeds 100,000 tons a year. There is tremendous diversity in the
volume of cargo shipped, as can be seen in Figure 7.1 which plots the imports and

227
exports of the major trading countries (note that a log scale is used). Trade volume
varies from a few hundred thousand tons at one extreme to hundreds of millions of
tons at the other, showing some correlation between the volume of imports and
exports. This chart offers an important insight into seaborne trade from the viewpoint
of the trade analyst. Every one of the one hundred dots in Figure 7.1 represents a
country with its own unique geographical position, economic infrastructure, and
political policies. To be aware of each country’s circumstances in a general way is
difficult enough; to follow these circumstances in sufficient detail to forecast their
future trade flows calls for a research team of a size rarely found in the shipping
industry. If nothing else, this shows what a complex task trade analysts face. Clearly
a short cut is needed. We must look for a theory which will allow us to generalize
about the factors which determine a country’s trade. Armed with this theory we
can reduce the task to more manageable proportions.
FIGURE 7.1 Seaborne imports and exports 1991
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics
The starting point is to look more closely at the economic differences between
the trading countries. Table 7.4 (at the end of this chapter) ranks the countries by
their tonnage of total trade in 1990/1. The first two columns show the imports and
exports of each country, column 3 shows total trade, which has been used for the
ranking exercise, while the remaining columns show a selection of economic
variables for each country.
The biggest trading country is the United States with 838 mt of trade, followed
by Japan with trade of 815 mt and Netherlands with trade of 373 mt. Whilst it is
hardly surprising that the United States, the world’s largest economy, should appear
at the top of the list, it is more surprising that the Netherlands, a tiny country,
should appear in third place. This provides a first glimpse of the type of questions
that need to be answered. Moving to the bottom of the list, we find some countries
THE COUNTRIES THAT TRADE BY SEA

THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF MARITIME TRADE
228
with very little trade. Lebanon with trade of 1.3 mt, Haiti with trade of 874,000
tons and Cambodia with trade of 106,000 tons.1
Also shown in the table are three indicators of economic size, land area (measured
in thousand hectares), population (measured in millions) and gross national product
(GNP) (measured in million dollars). The final column shows two important ratios,
GNP per capita, an indicator of wealth, and trade intensity (TI) which shows the
tonnage of imports per billion dollars of GNP. In studying country trade we need
to examine each of these variables—the size of the region, its level of economic
activity, the location of natural resources and, of course, the availability of shipping
infrastructure such as ports and waterways.
Economic activity and seaborne trade
The most obvious explanation of a country’s seaborne trade is the size of its
economy. Common sense tells us that bigger economies are likely to generate
more trade. If we examine the relationship between seaborne imports and GNP we
find there is indeed a close relationship, as is demonstrated by the graph in Figure
7.2. This plots the seaborne imports of 94 countries in 1990/1 against their GNP,
using a logarithmic scale. As the level of GNP increases, so do imports. For example
the USA has a GNP of $5,610 billion and imports of 449 mt, whereas the GNP of
Gabon is only $4.8 billion and it has sea imports of 212,000 tons.
Taking the analysis a stage further and fitting a linear regression model of
seaborne imports on GNP (see graph inset) we find that 69 per cent of the variation
in seaborne imports is explained by variations in GNP. The model implies that
trade starts when GNP reaches $17.5 billion and increases by 116,000 tons for
each $1 billion increase in GNP. The relationship is not perfect, but it is clearly
significant and follows the sort of pattern we would expect. There are three reasons
why rich countries with a high GNP might be expected to have a higher level of
imports than a poor country with low GNP. First, a larger economy has greater
needs in terms of the raw materials and manufactured goods which are shipped by
sea. By the law of averages some of these will not be available locally. Second,
along the long road to economic development, local resources are likely to become
depleted, leading to the need for imports. Third, a country with high GNP can
afford to purchase imports and has more to export in return.
TABLE 7.1 Analysis of trade relationships
Source: Figures 7.2–7.4

229
Size, natural resources and seaborne trade
When considering the trade of a country, the next factor to consider is its physical
size. We might expect the size of a country in terms of its land area to influence
trade because it determines the amount of physical resources available locally.
After all, reserves of energy, minerals and the production of agriculture and forestry
are all likely to be greater in a large land mass than a smaller one. When we examine
the correlation between sea trade and land area, measured in million hectares,
shown in Figure 7.3, we find that there is indeed a relationship. The correlation
coefficient is 0.22, suggesting that 22 per cent of the variation in trade is explained
by a country’s area. However, the relationship is much weaker that the relationship
with GNP and there are many countries that very obviously do not fit the model.
Of the countries shown in Table 7.4, Canada has the largest land mass with 997
million hectares, but ranks fourteenth in terms of trade. Singapore, a country with
only 62,000 hectares has roughly the same trade volume as Canada. Land area
obviously plays a far smaller part in determining trade volume than economic
activity. On reflection this is not really such a surprising result. It reinforces the
point that trade is about economic growth, not physical size. A country may be
very large, but if it is mainly empty, there will not be very much trade.
Much the same result is obtained when we examine the relationship between
natural resources and trade. Obviously seaborne trade, particularly bulk trade, must
be influenced by the availability of raw materials, particularly cereals, oil, coal,
gas and iron ore. These are the essential inputs to a modern industrial society. The
FIGURE 7.2 Seaborne imports and GNP
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics
THE COUNTRIES THAT TRADE BY SEA

THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF MARITIME TRADE
230
FIGURE 7.4 Seaborne trade and resources
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics
FIGURE 7.3 Sea trade and land area
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics

231
statistical evidence confirms the existence of this link, but also demonstrates that
the relationship is not sufficiently consistent to show up in a simple regression
analysis. A regression of trade volume on the total tonnage production of cereals,
oil, coal and iron ore listed for each country produces a correlation coefficient of
0.24. In other words about one quarter of the variation in trade can be explained by
resources. The relationship is shown graphically in Figure 7.4.
It is not difficult to account for the weakness of this relationship. The precise
amount of trade arising from natural resources in a matter of supply/demand
economics. Where demand is high and no local reserves are available, as in the
case of iron ore used by the Japanese steel industry or oil used by France and
Germany, trade is directly related to demand. More often there is an economic
choice between domestic and imported resources. For example, Europe has
extensive coal deposits, but recently preferred to import cheaper foreign coal. In
the United States oil imports are influenced by decisions taken about the depletion
of domestic oil fields. In large economies domestic resources are diverted to the
domestic market, whereas in small economies they are available for export. As we
shall see when we study trade theory, factor endowments play a vital part in
explaining trade, but this does not allow us to generalize about the relationship
between resources and trade. The results of the regression analysis is a reminder of
this fact.
Population and sea trade
Finally there is population. The idea that population and trade go hand in hand
stretches back to the nineteenth century trader’s dream of ‘oil for the lamps of
China’. If there are enough people, it was argued, there is great trading potential.
Much the same hopes were extended to South American countries like Brazil. In
both cases the expectations were disappointed and trade was slow to develop, despite
the size of the population. For example, Brazil has a population of 150 million,
considerably larger than Japan’s 124 million, but generates only one quarter as
much trade. A statistical analysis of the relationship between population and trade,
shows virtually no correlation. The coefficient of correlation is 0.04. If nothing
else this demonstrates that sea trade is primarily an economic phenomenon.
Economic activity creates the demand for imports and the supply of exports, not
numbers of people.
7.3 An explanation of trade theory
This discussion of the causes of trade naturally leads on to the question of trade
theory. Why do some countries trade more than others? In a general way we have
seen that this can be explained by the level of economic activity and, to a lesser
extent, by land area and natural resources. A theoretical framework would be useful,
however, to explain these relationships. We have shown empirically that the most
important single cause of trade growth is GNP, but these are just statistical
relationships. Every economist is taught that statistical relationships can change. It
AN EXPLANATION OF TRADE THEORY

THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF MARITIME TRADE
232
would be reassuring to know why trade increases with GNP and, more importantly,
the circumstances under which this important relationship might break down. To
answer these questions we must turn to trade theory. Although there is no single
theory of trade because in reality countries trade for a variety of reasons, economists
have come up with some principles which are useful in explaining the basic
principles which govern trade. In the following sections we review trade theory, to
establish the theories developed by economists to show why trade is so beneficial.
We then review the economic relationship between economic growth and seaborne
trade. Finally we examine the dynamic relationships involved, to establish why
regions differ in their trading patterns.
The reason why countries trade
We start with the question ‘why do countries trade?’ At first sight this seems too
obvious to deserve very much attention, but in a world of politically motivated
nation states, trade cannot be taken for granted. If countries do not believe that
trade is in their interest they can close their borders. China, the USSR, and Japan
have all followed this policy in recent history. A policy of not trading, or limiting
trade by tariffs or quotas, is known as ‘protectionism’, or in its extreme form
‘isolationism’. It seeks to exclude the goods produced by foreigners from local
markets in order to protect the livelihood of local producers. Protectionism can
look very attractive to a community which feels that its livelihood is under threat.
One reason for adopting these policies is to protect local resources. It may seem
that valuable raw materials are being exported by unprincipled traders, leaving
nothing for the local inhabitants. When the reserves are all gone, the country will
be left in poverty.2 Another is to protect local jobs and skills which have been
developed over many years. If the local shipyard or car plant, on which thousands
of jobs depend, is about to close because it cannot compete with foreign yards,
offering subsidies or passing laws preventing imports is a natural response. After
all, this could be just the beginning. Soon other industries will be under attack and
then how will the country earn its living? Currency reserves will drain away and
the country will be left in poverty. Or will it?
Three hundred years ago David Hume addressed this question in his Discourse
on the Balance of Trade (1752) (see Meek, 1973). Hume did not think much of this
line of protectionism, commenting:
It is very usual in nations ignorant of the nature of commerce, to prohibit the
exportation of commodities, and to preserve among themselves whatever they
think valuable and useful… There still prevails, even in nations well acquainted
with commerce, a strong jealousy with regard to the balance of trade, and a fear,
that gold and silver may be leaving them.
In nineteenth-century Britain, as in many developing economies, free trade became
a major political issues, centring on the question of whether the import of cheap
grain should be permitted. Manufacturers in the towns were in favour because they

233
wanted cheap food for their workers, but the domestic landowners, who stood to
lose their protected market, were opposed. The issue split the country. Eventually
free trade prevailed and in 1847 the ‘Corn Laws’, which prohibited imports, were
repealed allowing Britain to develop as an industrial economy. Today the principles
of free trade are broadly accepted through the General Agreement on Trade and
Tariffs (GATT), but protectionism remains a live issue. In the West there are still
concerns that developing economies in Asia will put the older industrial countries
out of business, as demonstrated by the difficulties faced by the GATT negotiations
over ten years. Apart from any personal considerations for the inhabitants of the
developed countries, this would be very bad for shipping. Even where trade is
relatively open, many countries protect inefficient industries whose output, in a
free market would be replaced by trade.
In the face of these often strongly held views, one of the challenges facing
economists is to show that free trade is always in the interest of the trading parties.
This is one area where the early nineteenth century economists were very successful.
They came up with a very convincing proof that trade is beneficial. Since this
theory also provides some useful insights into the causes of trade and guidance in
developing trade models, the study of trade theory is doubly useful.
The theory of absolute advantage
The first step in developing a proof that trade is beneficial was made by Adam
Smith and is referred to as the ‘theory of absolute advantage’. He argued that
countries are better off if they specialize, trading their surplus production for the
other goods they need. Specialization allows them to become more productive and
everyone benefits because the world’s limited economic resources (factors of
production) are used more efficiently. To illustrate the point he drew an analogy
with tradesmen who are better off if they specialize,
It is the maxim of every prudent master of a family, never to attempt to make at
home what it will cost him more to make than to buy. The tailor does not attempt
to make his own shoes, but buys them from the shoemaker. The shoemaker does
not attempt to make his own clothes, but employs a tailor. What is prudence in
the conduct of every private family, can scarce be folly in that of a great kingdom.
If a foreign country can supply us with a commodity cheaper than we ourselves
can make it, better buy of them with some part of the produce of our own industry,
employed in a way in which we have some advantage.3
Goods are cheaper because trade permits greater division of labour, allowing more
to be produced with the same resources. So long as transport costs do not exceed
the cost saving in production, trade is bound to be beneficial.
The point is easily demonstrated. Consider two countries, Britain and the US,
who produce two goods, food and cloth. Both have sixty labourers. US labour is
more efficient at producing food, but UK workers are more productive at making
cloth. Assume that there are constant costs (i.e. it requires the same amount of
AN EXPLANATION OF TRADE THEORY

THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF MARITIME TRADE
234
labour to produce a unit of output, regardless of volume) and the labour
requirements are as follows:
The UK can produce 15 tons of food,
30 bales of cloth, or any combination.
Write this as (15, 30). Similarly the US
can produce 20 tons of food or 10 bales
of cloth, so the production possibility is
(20, 10). Now suppose the population of
each country needs 12 tons of food to live
on. Without trade Britain would need 48
units of labour to produce 12 tons of food.
With the remaining 12 units of labour it
could produce 6 bales of cloth, so its
output would be (12, 6). The US would only need 36 units of labour to produce the
12 tons of food. With the remaining 24 units of labour they could produce 6 units
of cloth (12, 6). In other words both countries are equally well off, being able to
feed themselves and produce 6 bales of cloth.
Now we introduce trade and allow the two countries to specialize in their best
products. The US switches all its labour into food. It produces 20 tons, of which it
consumes 12 and exports 8 units to the UK. Thanks to the imports the UK only
needs to produce 4 tons of food, which requires 16 units of labour. With the
remaining 44 units of labour it can produce 22 bales of cloth. It consumes 11 bales
of cloth itself and exports 11 bales to the US in return for the food. Thus with trade
both countries consume (12, 11). Thanks to trade they each have the food they
need and almost twice as much cloth. They are rich.
The theory of comparative advantage
This theory leaves a crucial question unanswered. In the example one country is
more efficient at producing each commodity—the US is better at food and the UK
at cloth. Suppose one country is better at producing all goods? Surely free trade
would be a threat to the less efficient country whose food and textile businesses
would be driven out of business, leaving them in poverty? If this is true, inefficient
countries must avoid trade at all costs. The Theory of Comparative Advantage,
published by David Ricardo in 1817, demonstrated that this was not the case. He
proved that trade is beneficial, even if one country is more efficient than its trading
partners at producing all goods. If we rerun the example, but make the US better at
producing both food and cloth, the countries are still richer with trade than without.
The US now requires less labour than
the UK to produce both food and cloth. If
there is no trade it can produce the 12 tons
of food it needs and 24 bales of cloth (12,
24). Britain would produce 12 tons of
food, but only six bales of cloth (12, 6).
However if the countries specialize in the
product in which they are relatively more

235
efficient, their production increases. The UK is now relatively more efficient at
food production, because British food requires only twice as much labour as cloth,
whereas in the US food requires three times as much labour. So the UK specializes
in food, producing 15 tons, consuming 12 and leaving a surplus of 3 to export.
With imports of 3 tons of food, the US would now only have to produce 9 tons of
food, requiring 27 units of labour. With the remaining 33 units of labour it could
produce 33 bales of cloth. This compares with the total world cloth production
before trade of 30 units (i.e. 24 plus 6). Trade has increased output by 3 bales of
cloth. Not much, but better than nothing.
The heart of the theory is that provided each country is more efficient at producing
some goods than others, trade will be beneficial if each country specializes in the
products at which it is relatively most efficient. More wealth is created by trade
because limited ‘factors of production’ are used more efficiently and all participants
are better off than they would be without trade.4 This has important implications
for trade. The appearance of new competitors in the international market does not
put existing traders out of business. Provided there are relative differences in
efficiency it leads to more trade and greater wealth, though it does leave some
difficult questions about how the gains from trade are distributed between the
participating countries.
Of course free trade it is not all good news. Changes in trading patterns as the
comparative advantage alters are often painful for the interest groups concerned.
The landowners who resisted the repeal of the Corn Laws in nineteenth century
Britain were right in thinking that they would suffer from free trade. After the
industrial interests won and the Corn Laws were repealed in 1847, cheap imported
corn impoverished the countryside and many workers migrated to the towns helping
Britain to become even more successful as an exporter of manufactures. In the end
Britain as a whole was better off for free trade, but the process of change left some
individuals, particularly landowners worse off. There are parallels with the
competition between European and Far East heavy industry in the 1970s and 1980s.
Much European heavy industry was driven out of business by Far East competition.
It is not much compensation to the redundant shipyard worker that he has lost his
job because the country now has a comparative advantage in financial services, a
business that has no call for welders.
7.4 Theories about the pattern of trade
So far we have concentrated on the general principles which explain trade. The
next step is to consider which countries trade in what commodities. Why does the
US, a major oil producer, import oil? What determines the goods which countries
like Greece or the UK export? Why did China suddenly import 34 mt of steel
products in 1994. Why is the Japanese export trade in manufactures so high? Why
does Europe import so many Japanese motor cars when it has a car industry of its
own? There are many explanations of trade, but we will focus on four, resource
based trade, technology based trade, trade based on differences in consumer tastes,
and cyclical trade.
THEORIES ABOUT THE PATTERN OF TRADE

THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF MARITIME TRADE
236
Resource based trade and the Heckscher-Ohlin theory
One of the most important causes of trade from the shipping industry’s point of
view is the fact that different countries are endowed with different natural resources.
The importance of resources was first recognized by trade economists who were
looking for an explanation of what determines the comparative advantage of a
country. This was an issue which Ricardo did not address and it was more than a
century before that economists came up with a theoretical explanation. The key
issue turned out to be the assumption of constant costs, which is one of the basic
building blocks of Ricardo’s model.
The theory of comparative advantage assumes that resources can be freely
switched between the manufacture of different products without any loss of
productivity. Even in the abstract world of economic theory this is clearly not
realistic. In the 1920s two Swedish economists, Eli Heckscher and Bent Ohlin,
concluded that productivity differences occur because countries have different
endowments of factors of production, and there is limited factor substitution. For
example, America with its great prairies can expand grain production, but if the
UK tries to do the same thing, as we assumed in the example on page (235), by
switching its abundant labour into agriculture, yields start to fall as the land is
farmed more intensively. Conversely, although the UK with its abundant skilled
labour can easily expand cloth production, the US runs into diminishing returns
due to the lack of suitable labour. Thus the Heckscher-Ohlin theory argues that the
explanation of comparative advantage lies in differences in the factors of production
between countries. All we need for trade to be beneficial is that economic resources
are unevenly distributed between countries. Winters (1991)5 summarizes these
minimum conditions as follows:
1
The production functions for the two products give constant returns to scale if
both factors are applied proportionally, but diminishing returns to any individual
factor (i.e. if a country runs out of land, but keeps applying more labour,
fertilizers, machinery, etc., marginal returns fall).
2
Goods differ in their requirements of different factor inputs (e.g. food production
needs more land than textile manufacture).
3
The countries have different relative factor endowments.
As an illustration, imagine the ‘no trade’ situation on two islands. Each relies on
its domestic resources. Island A struggles to feed a large population by intensive
agriculture on the limited land available. It mines coal from a few deep mines and
manufactures a whole range of products, mainly on a small scale. In agriculture
and labour they face sharply increasing costs as they try to maintain growth by
pouring more labour into fixed physical resources. Island B is the same but has
open cast coal mines and better land. If trade is opened up the islands specialize.
Because Island A has few natural resources, its comparative advantage is in
manufacturing. It imports coal and food from Island B and switches the labour into
relatively more productive manufacturing industry. In other words they export those
goods whose production is relatively intensive in the factors with which they are

237
well endowed. Island B opens more coal mines and switches labour into them,
exporting coal. It all depends on their relative factor endowment. The precise
definition of ‘natural resource’ raises all sorts of questions. In chapter 8 we show
that the trading world is constantly on the move, so we should not rely too heavily
on static models. However the Heckscher—Ohlin theory suggests that in a free
world market countries must make the best of whatever resources they have.
Trade based on technology differences
A very different reason for trade is technical innovation. Manufactured goods
often require specialist investment and expertise. Once a particular company or
country has become established in this area, it is difficult for others to build up
sufficient volume of sales to break into that market. In the nineteenth century
Britain developed mechanized textile manufacturing, and for some years gained a
great benefit from this. Eventually other countries caught up. Today technical
advance is continuous. The manufacture of medical equipment, the production of
a particular type of rubber belt drive, or the manufacture of complex products
such as cruise ships and aircraft are all examples where one country has developed
a competitive advantage based on technical innovation and is protected by barriers
such as the high cost of entry. In the case of particular inventions the manufacturing
rights may even be covered by a patent.
Trade based on differences in tastes
Anyone studying trade statistics will soon notice another type of trade, called
inter-industry trade where countries import and export the same products. Motor
cars are a classic example, but petroleum products, electronic equipment and a
whole range of consumer goods also qualify. In these cases the cause of trade is
usually differences in tastes between countries. For example, motor car
manufacturers face economies of scale, so low volume production is expensive. If
most Americans like to drive very big motor cars, while most Europeans prefer to
drive small motor cars, then the minority in Europe who wish to purchase large
motor cars can benefit from importing American cars and vice versa. This has had
a tremendous impact on trade. In most countries consumers can now choose from
twenty or thirty different brands of motor car, each sold at a highly competitive
price. The production economics of car manufacture is such that if the market
were fully supplied by UK manufacturers, there could only be a small number of
different designs, and costs would almost certainly be higher. Similarly if oil
refineries are technically restricted to producing a mix of petroleum products
which does not exactly match local demand, they will seek to export the products
not needed locally.
Cyclical trade
In a world economy where demand is constantly changing, an important source of
sea trade is the temporary local shortage of a product or commodity which could
THEORIES ABOUT THE PATTERN OF TRADE

THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF MARITIME TRADE
238
normally be obtained locally at a competitive price. Temporary shortages may
arise from business cycles in demand, mechanical failure, disasters (e.g. the Kobe
earthquake in 1994), poor planning or a sudden burst of commodity inflation which
encourages manufacturers to build stocks of raw materials. In these circumstances
the pattern of trade suddenly changes. For example chemical manufacturers produce
many different compounds and much of the seaborne chemicals trade is to supply
temporary shortages for a particular compound or feedstock.
7.5 Economic growth and sea trade
Growth and trade
Now it is time to expolore the relationship between economic growth and sea trade.
Our analysis of the ‘causes’ of sea trade at the start of this chapter identified
economic activity (GNP) as by far the most important. We showed that trade
increases with GNP at an average rate of 116,000 tons for each $1 billion of GNP.
One of the important lessons to be learnt is that the relationship between trade and
GNP is not static. It is dynamic. When countries grow their economies change and
so does their trade. One of the most fundamental principles of trade forecasting is
to recognize the potential for change and build it into the forecast. To do this we
must question the relationship between trade and GNP.
The key to this particular issue is the way different parts of the economy respond
to growth. If we look more closely at the structure of world economic activity we
can immediately see why trade is likely to change as a country grows. Gross National
Product (GNP), a measure of the total economic output, can be divided into the
nine different sectors shown in the table below, which follow the ‘International
Standard Industrial Classification’ (ISIC).
Each sector has a different propensity for maritime transport. Agriculture, mining
and manufacturing are directly involved with trade, either through imports or
exports, and growth in these sectors usually generates trade. In contrast businesses
in the wholesale, retail, transport and ‘service’ sectors generate little cargo. The

239
‘service’ sector has a particularly low propensity to trade. It consists of activities
such as banking and insurance, public administration, social services, education,
medicine, recreation facilities, and household services (repair, laundry) which have
little if any impact on maritime transport. A thriving industrial economy is good
for the shipping industry, but any trend towards services or ‘hi-tech’ is bad news.
When we examine the growth of modern economies we find that economic
activity shifts away from the trade intensive activities towards the service sector. It
follows that we must expect the pattern of trade growth to change as the country
grows and develops. To illustrate the nature of this change, Table 7.2 shows how
the GDP of South Korea, Japan and the United States changed over a twenty-five-
year period from 1965 to 1989. In all three countries trade intensive activities like
manufacturing lost share, while services gained. In South Korea, a country in the
early stages of industrialization, agriculture fell sharply by 28 per cent, while mining,
utilities, construction, manufacturing and the service sector all increased. In other
words South Korea changed from a rural society to a modern industrial economy
and seaborne imports grow very rapidly at 11 per cent per annum. Japan was already
industrialized in 1965 with a very small agricultural sector and very well developed
manufacturing sector, so we see a very different pattern of development. Agriculture,
mining, utilities, construction and manufacturing all lost ground, but services
increased by 10 per cent. In the US we see yet another pattern, with services taking
a dominant position in the economy. In 1965 the share of service was already very
high at 59 per cent, but in the next 24 years it increased to 69 per cent of GDP.
Agriculture, traditionally a major US business, fell to 2 per cent. Mining, utilities
and construction fell by 9 per cent and manufacturing by 11 per cent. The contrast
TABLE 7.2 Changes in the structure of GNP 1965–89 for S. Korea, Japan and
USA
Source: World Development Report 1991, World Bank
ECONOMIC GROWTH AND SEA TRADE

THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF MARITIME TRADE
240
between the South Korean economy with its growing industrial sector and the US
with its dominant service economy is very apparent.
However this is not the whole story. As manufacturing industry loses market
share, there is also a change in the type of goods manufactured. An analysis carried
out by Maizels (1971) to establish a typical pattern of expansion of manufacturing
industry, shown in Table 7.3, illustrates the point. At low income levels food
manufacturing and textile industries are the most important when, in accordance
with Engel’s Law, these products make up a large part of demand. Their share
then declines rapidly, to be taken over by metals, metal products and chemical. At
TABLE 7.3 Pattern of manufacturing production changes in the pattern of
manufacturing production per head at 1955 prices and percentages
Source: A.Maizels Growth and Trade (1971)
a certain income level the share of metals stabilizes, while the share of metal
products continues to grow as more value is added to the basic materials. This
implies that output becomes less resource intensive at high income levels, being
directed towards value added products. For example, motor car production
progresses from economy models to executive limousines. Again we see evidence
that we must expect the structure of economic activity to change with growth,
bringing consequences for trade.
The stages of economic development
Academics have spent much time discussing these changes to see if there is a
consistent pattern of development. The ‘stages of growth’ theory developed by
Professor W.W.Rostow provides a useful starting point.6 He argued that as economies
grow they go through a series of different phases which he put into 5 categories
according to the stage of economic development they had reached. The 5 stages
are shown in Box 7.1.
There has been a good deal of discussion of Rostow’s work. Like so many
economic theories, Rostow’s theory is based in a simple common sense idea. As
economies grow they start by producing necessities like infrastructure which are
resource intensive, then progressively turn to the finer things of life (‘value added
products’) as they become wealthier. Maizels (1971), who made a very long-term
study of this hypothesis, explained it in the following terms:

241
as a country becomes progressively more industrialised the proportion of the
occupied population engaged in manufacturing does not rise indefinitely—there
is an effective limit which may have been reached in a number of countries.
This limit comes into operation for two reasons. Firstly as the economy grows
and income rises the demand for workers in service operations such as doctors,
typists, government officials increases as fast or faster than the demand for
manufactured goods. Secondly as productivity increases in manufacturing tend
to outstrip the productivity increase in the distribution of goods from factory to
the consumer, these workers tend to be absorbed in distribution to match the
increased flow of industrial products.7
Stage 1
The traditional society. This is a predominantly agricultural economy.
Unchanging technology places a ceiling on the level of attainable output
per head. This ceiling results from the fact that ‘the potentialities which
flow from modern science and technology are either not available or
not regularly and systematically applied’. These societies devote a very
high proportion of their resources to agriculture. They hardly trade by
sea except for food aid and the export of a few cash crops.
Stage 2
The pre-conditions of take-off established. The second stage requires a
surplus above subsistence, the development of education and a degree
of capital accumulation to provide the foundation for economic growth.
For example, in seventeenth century England these conditions were
established by a change in attitudes to investment, the emergence of
banks and other institutions for mobilizing capital, etc. Sea trade is
small but very active and growing fast.
Stage 3
The take-off. In Rostow’s analysis this stage is followed by a long interval
of sustained but fluctuating progress as modern technology is extended
over the whole front of economic activities. Increased investment permits
output regularly to outstrip the increase in national population. New
industries appear, older ones level off and decline. Changes take place
in the external trade of the country, goods formerly imported are
produced at home, new import requirements develop and new
commodities are made for export.
Stage 4
Maturity. After a period which Rostow placed at 60 years after the
beginning of take-off, maturity sets in. By this stage the economy has
extended its range into more refined and complex processes, with a
shift in focus from coal, steel and heavy engineering industries to
machine tools, chemicals and electrical equipment. He thought
Germany, Britain, France and the United States passed through this
phase by the end of the nineteenth century or shortly afterwards.
Depletion of raw materials may boost the import trade, while
manufacture will dominate exports.
Stage 5
Mass Consumption. The fifth stage sees a movement of the leading
sectors of industry towards durable consumer goods and services. A
large proportion of the population can afford to consume much more
than basic food, shelter and clothing and this brings about changes in
the structure of the working population, including a progressive
movement into office and service work.
BOX 7.1 Rostow’s five stages of economic development
ECONOMIC GROWTH AND SEA TRADE

THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF MARITIME TRADE
242
This reasoning suggests that the progress of economic growth will be associated
with an increasing share for services and a corresponding decline in the growth
rate of manufacturing industry and seaborne trade. Whilst it is not possible to set
precise limits on the duration of a stage, or even to be sure when a new stage is
about to begin, the concept of a progression is helpful.
The trade development cycle (TDC)
If we apply the ‘stages of growth’ concept to trade it is clear that, over a period of
years, we must expect the trade of a country to change. How it changes depends on
what stage the economy has reached in the economic growth cycle. The early
stages of growth involve the import of all but the most simple items such as food
and textiles paid for by the export of whatever ‘cash crops’ are available—sugar,
tropical fruit, oil, copper, jute, hardwood logs are typical examples. The availability
of foreign exchange is the main constraint on trade and generally keeps trade at a
low level. Countries such as Guinea, Togo and Cameroon in West Africa currently
fall into this category.
As the economy develops through stages 2 and 3, the demand for raw materials
such as iron ore, coal, non-ferrous metal ores and forest products increases as the
industrial infrastructure is built up. If raw materials are not available locally they
must be imported, as must the more sophisticated machinery, and paid for by exports
of semi-manufactures and any primary exports which are available. The
reconciliation of domestic and foreign markets thus forms a basic requirement of
growth at this stage. Industries such as shipbuilding and automobiles are frequently
developed as lead export earners, a pattern set by Japan in the 1950s and
subsequently followed by South Korea, Poland and several other countries.
When the economy matures, the rate of growth of seaborne trade changes again.
In the course of time, possibly 20 years or 50, the building blocks of a capitalist
economy are in place. Industrial infrastructure, housing, roads, railways and stocks
of consumer durables such as motor vehicles and washing machines have reached
a mature level. Industries such as steel, construction and vehicle manufacture, which
underpinned the growth during stage 2, stop growing and economic activity
gravitates towards less material intensive activities. Manufacturing gravitates
towards the higher value added end of the product range. How this affects trade
depends on domestic resources. If the economy has always relied on imported raw
materials, the growth rate of bulk imports slows, though the trade in manufacture
shipped by liner and air freight will continue to grow. Typically this produces a
trade development cycle of the type shown by curve A in Figure 7.5. However the
sea trade of countries with extensive natural resources is likely to follow a different
growth path. Growth consumes resources and as domestic supplies become depleted,
or better quality materials become available abroad, bulk imports may start to
increase. This happened in the US in the 1970s when oil demand drew ahead of
domestic production and imports started to grow rapidly. In such cases the trade
development cycle may follow a path more like curve B in Figure 7.5.

243
Ultimately the seaborne trade development cycle is just a convenient way of
summarizing certain common patterns which appear to occur in the world
economy—it is not a law, nor does it apply in every case. Since economic
development draws heavily on natural resources which are unevenly distributed
between countries, we must expect each country to have a unique TDC, determined
by its factor endowments or other unique political and cultural characteristics.
Thus the TDC of a resource rich economy which can draw on local raw materials
in the early stages of growth, possibly with an exportable surplus, will be completely
different from the TDC of a country without raw materials. What we can be sure of
is that economies are constantly changing and these changes have a major impact
on the international transport industry.
7.6 Trade forecasting and the commodity
trade model
The problems of forecasting commodity trade
Modern industrial economies need energy commodities such as coal and oil, mineral
resources such as iron ore, non-ferrous metal ores, and agricultural products such
as grain and other foodstuffs. One of the main tasks of the bulk shipping industry
is to anticipate future trade, so that efficient transport can be planned. This is where
FIGURE 7.5 Seaborne trade development cycle
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
TRADE FORECASTING AND THE COMMODITY TRADE MODEL

THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF MARITIME TRADE
244
the dynamics of the trade development cycle become important and changes in the
industries which drive trade must be carefully considered. The supply/demand
model is the most commonly used technique for carrying out this analysis.
In its basic form the supply/demand model is simple enough and even analysts
with no training in economics find little difficulty in coming to terms with it. When
resources are very unevenly distributed around the world, supply/demand analysis
involves working out local demand and identifying the supply source from which
the raw materials will come. If domestic supply is zero, imports depend on domestic
demand plus stock changes. For example Japan has no local supplies of iron ore,
so it must import what it needs from one of the established mines in Australia or
Brazil. Although this is basic common sense, there are hidden dangers which become
apparent when we examine the economic relationships underlying trade. Some
examples illustrate the complexity of this apparently simple model.
Picking up the example of forecasting Japanese iron ore imports, there is the
impact of economic development (i.e. the Trade Development Cycle) on steel
demand to consider. As the Japanese economy matures, the demand for steel may
change. This caught out forecasters in the early 1970s. They assumed that steel
demand in Europe and Japan would continue to grow at the same rate in the 1970s
as it had in the 1960s. To meet this demand steelmakers planned to expand output
from 110 mt to 180 mt. As the economy matured demand stopped growing and
Japanese steel production never exceeded 120 mt. A more carefully structured
forecasting model would have shown that demand growth in the 1960s was driven
by stockbuilding of steel intensive products like buildings and motor vehicles and
that the trend was likely to change as the economy matured.
Another potential trap for unwary forecasters is factor substitution. Japan has
no reserves of iron ore, but there are other materials such as steel scrap which will
do the same job. If the supply of steel scrap increases, this can be used instead of
ore. Suddenly the iron ore demand forecast becomes more complex. Or consider
the coal trade for use in power stations. There may be no local coal, but power
stations might start to use oil or gas in place of coal. The substitution of coal for oil
in power stations was one of the major causes of the long tanker depression in the
1980s. Oil trade models at the time did not consider this possibility. Another
possibility is the competition between domestic and foreign supplies. The slow
rundown of European iron ore production in the 1960s was the result of price
competition between high cost domestic mines and foreign suppliers with low cost
but greater transport costs. Cheap transport made the trade viable. Sometimes
technology changes alter the domestic or foreign production functions, with major
consequences for trade. For example, the rise of ‘mini mills’ using cheap scrap in
Asia provides direct competition for blast furnace steel, changing the pattern of
the iron ore trade. Similarly new technology which reduced the cost of offshore
production enabled Europe to increase its domestic oil production in the 1990s.
Whilst these relationships are not easy to quantify, forecasters should at least be
aware that they exist. Although the detailed discussion of the commodity trades
must wait until chapter 9, in this chapter we take a closer look at the economic
model which underlies most commodity trades.

245
Economic principles of analysing commodity trades
The starting point for the commodity trade model is price. Commodities are traded
when it is cheaper to import than to use the locally available substitutes. Thus the
model consists of a demand function for the commodity, showing the relationship
between demand for the commodity and its price, and a supply function which
shows the price at which the commodity is available. This means that we are
concerned with the balance of supply, demand and prices.
The demand function describes the relationship between per capita income,
commodity prices, and the consumption of the product is generally referred to as
the Consumer Demand Function.
E7(1)
where q is per capita consumption of the commodity, p1 is its price in domestic
currency, p2 is the price of other commodities and y is per capita income for the i
th country in year t.8 This function suggests that the demand for a commodity
responds to changes in relative prices and income. To explain how demand responds
to a change in price we need to introduce two economic concepts, the income
elasticity and the price elasticity.
The income elasticity shows how consumers adjust their consumption of a
commodity in response to a change in income. It is defined as the proportionate
change in the purchase of the commodity such as energy for a change in income,
with prices constant.
E7(2)
In other words the income elasticity is the percentage change in demand divided
by the percentage change in income. The nature of this relationship varies from
one commodity to another, with important consequences for trade. We can use the
income elasticity to classify commodities into three different groups. Inferior goods
have a negative income elasticity (i.e. less than 0), so when income rises, demand
falls. For example, at higher incomes people typically consume less of basic foods
such as bread and potatoes, switching their demand to other foodstuffs such as
meat. Necessities are goods whose demand increases as income rises, but more
slowly than income (i.e. the income elasticity is in the range 0–1). Finally, luxuries
are goods for which demand grows faster as income rises (i.e. the income elasticity
is over 1). These differences are important because they warn us to expect demand
relationships to change as income rises (or falls). For example, the income elasticity
of motor cars could be very high at low income levels because buying a motor car
is a priority. When most people have a car the demand continues to rise with income
as a few buy second cars, but the rate of increase slows and car demand eventually
stagnates, or switches to higher value added vehicles. For anyone modelling the
demand for steel, much of which is used in motor vehicle production, it is vital to
model these relationships correctly. The important point is that demand for
commodities changes with income.
TRADE FORECASTING AND THE COMMODITY TRADE MODEL

THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF MARITIME TRADE
246
Equation E7(4) is known as the Slutsky equation. The first term on the right hand
side represents the substitution effect and the second the income effect. The
‘substitution effect’ measures the extent to which a change in the price of a
commodity results in the substitution (negative or positive) of other commodities
in the total budget. The ‘income effect’ measures the change in the level of
consumption due to the change in real disposable income as a result of the price
change. This relationship proved to be of crucial importance in explaining the
crude oil trade during the two oil crises in 1973 and 1979. When the price of oil
increased sharply in 1973, because oil was a necessity consumers were forced to
spend more on oil and had less income left to buy other goods. This slump in
demand for other goods triggered a deep recession in the OECD economies, which
in turn produced a fall in the demand for oil. This is an extreme example of the
‘income effect’ of a change in the price of a commodity. In addition there was a
substitution effect as consumers replaced high price oil with coal and gas whose
prices had not changed. Oil fired central heating suddenly became much less desirable
than it was previously (for a discussion of the substitution effect in industry, see
the discussion in the next paragraph). As a result the crude oil trade fell sharply
(see Figure 4.4 which shows how the oil trade declined).
Derived demand for a commodity
The next step in the raw materials trade model is to reproduce the relationship
between the demand for raw materials in an industry, and demand for the products
of that industry which are sold to the final consumer. Industrial users often have a
choice in sourcing their raw materials, raising the possibility that manufacturers
will substitute one raw material for another. Heavy industries such as steel
E7(3)
E7(4)
The ‘Price Elasticity’ shows how demand responds to a change in prices. It is
derived from the demand function and represents the percentage change of
consumption for a one per cent change in prices. In mathematical terms the price
elasticity can be expressed as follows:
where ep is the price elasticity, p is the price of the commodity and q the quantity
consumed. It is possible to sub-divide the price elasticity into two components, the
substitution effect and the income effect.

247
production and motor manufacturing are major users of raw materials, as is the
transport industry (for example ships’ bunkers). These industries will be concerned
with minimizing their costs and their demand for raw materials is derived from
the underlying demand for the commodities the industry produces. The starting
point is the cost function. For a given output level the cost function is:
E7(5)
where C is the cost of production, P is the price of each commodity, X represents
the quantities of factor inputs required at that price level and b is capital cost which
is assumed to be fixed. Faced with a change in the price of raw material (P1) and a
fixed capital stock, the key issue for the industrialist will be ‘is it cheaper to use
less (X1) and more of some other input (X2)?’ The answer to this question is provided
by the ‘Rate of Technical Substitution’ (RTS) which represents the extent to which
factor inputs can be substituted for each other. It can be defined:
E7(6)
We have already mentioned the example power stations which can use oil, coal or
gas. In 1973 when the oil price increased sharply, most power stations used oil and
were not equipped to burn other fuels, so the substitution effect (RTS) was small.
By 1979 when the price of oil rose to over $30 per barrel most power stations had
invested to allow other fuels like coal or gas to be burned. As a result the RTS was
very high and oil consumption fell sharply. Thus the RTS shows how the
manufacturers respond to a change in the relative price of their raw materials. The
RTS relationship outlined above is subject to the influence of technical development
and change, which may significantly influence the amount of primary energy
required to achieve a given effect—for example as a result of an improvement in
the fuel conversion rate in marine diesel engines.
7.7 Summary
In this chapter we have looked at sea trade from the viewpoint of the countries
which trade. There are 100 countries that trade by sea, but some are much bigger
than others. In 1991 the USA headed the list with 838 mt of imports and exports,
while Cambodia, the smallest, reported trade of only 106,000 tons. When we looked
for an explanation of the volume of a country’s trade it was clear that the level of
economic activity, measured by GNP, was by far the most important. Two other
explanatory variables, the size (area) of the country, and its natural resources make
a small contribution, explaining about a quarter of the variation in trade volume.
This does not mean they are unimportant, but rather that their impact on trade
cannot be reduced to a simple general rule. Population size, it seems, has no
SUMMARY

THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF MARITIME TRADE
248
explanatory value whatsoever. In conclusion, we must expect sea trade to go hand
in hand with economic growth, but modified by the availability of natural resources.
We then turned to trade theory for an explanation of why countries trade. The
theory of Absolute Advantage shows that countries enjoy a higher living standard
if they trade because it allows them to focus their scarce resources in the products
which they are most efficient at producing. Trade increases efficiency and everyone
is better off. Taking this explanation a step further, the theory of Comparative
Advantage, shows that countries are better off with trade even if their competitors
are more efficient at producing everything. All that is needed for trade to be
beneficial is that they are relatively better at producing some goods than their
competitors. Countries who fear that they will be reduced to poverty by foreign
competition are wrong, though in a changing world adjusting to new competitors
can be painful and expensive for some parts of the economy.
This leads on to the question: ‘what determines the comparative advantage of a
particular country?’ There are several different explanations. The Heckscher—
Ohlin theorem argues that if goods require different factor inputs and there are
diminishing returns when factors are substituted for each other, the comparative
advantage is determined by the distribution of factors of production. Thus countries
specialize in the goods which make the best use of their most abundant resources.
Differences in technology, tastes, transport costs and cyclical surpluses and shortages
are other reasons why countries trade.
We should expect the trade of a country is likely to change over time. Starting
from the proposition that GNP drives trade, we looked at the composition of GNP.
The International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) splits it into nine
categories, agriculture, manufacturing, services, etc. Some of these activities,
especially manufacturing, make extensive use of sea transport, while others such
as services do not. In practice we find that as a country grows, the structure of its
economy changes. The early stages of growth tend to use large quantities of physical
materials—infrastructure developments such as roads, railways, ports, stock of
cars, ships and industrial plant. Consequently there is a rapid expansion of import
trade, matched by a corresponding export trade in primary produce or simple
manufactures to pay for the imports. Whilst the early stages favour the bulk shipping
business, when the economy reaches maturity, the liner business gains from the
almost unlimited potential for shipping components and finished goods between
developed markets.
The Trade Development Cycle (TDC) summarizes this dynamic relationship
between the sea trade and economic growth. Each country has its own unique
TDC which depends on its factors of production as well as cultural and commercial
considerations. At the earliest stages of development imports of manufactures are
paid for by ‘cash crop’ exports. As industry expands, raw materials generate demand
for sea transport. The imports of countries with few natural resources slow, but in
countries which were initially resource rich, the depletion of domestic supplies
may lead to growing imports of some commodities. Imports and exports of
manufactures continue to grow as domestic import and export markets widen.
Thus the TDC has different implications for the bulk and liner businesses.
Finally we discussed the implications for the analysis and forecasting of sea

249
trade. The basic tool is supply/demand analysis, but we must be very careful to
consider the role of price and substitution in this model, and to recognize the
importance of timescale and the TDC. This model incorporates demand functions
which recognize the impact of price changes on consumer demand and income
(the Slutsky equation) and on the factor substitution by manufacturers.
SUMMARY

TABLE 7.4 Seaborne trade of 100 countries, ranked by trade volume

Source: Compiled from various sources
Notes:
* as available
(1) Import intensity in kt imports per $ billion
TABLE 7.4 cont’d

