253
Chapter 8
The global pattern of
maritime trade
Such therefore are the advantages of water carriage, it is natural that the
first improvements of art and industry should be made where this
convenience opens the whole world for a market to the produce of every
sort of labor
(Adam Smith ‘Inquiry Into The Wealth of Nations’ 1776)
Chapter 8

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
254
8.1. Introduction
Shipping is first and foremost an international business, so we must be aware of
how the different parts of the trading world fit together. When we delve into
history it turns out that the pattern of trade, which to contemporary observers
looks so firmly established, is in fact constantly changing. Today’s economic
geography is just a snapshot taken at a point in time as the world economy creeps
along its evolutionary path. The pace is so slow that we can hardly see the motion
but, viewed from a historical perspective, the progress is evident. Although economic
textbooks sometimes give the impression that the evolution of trade has been one
of harmonious economic development, it can equally well be seen as a continuous
struggle of power politics for control of trade.1
Today’s ‘snapshot’ features the 100 trading countries we discussed in Chapter
7. Our aim in this chapter is to take the analysis of trade a step further and build up
the bigger picture of how these 100 trading countries fit together into the maritime
trading world. We found that a country’s pattern of sea trade depends on three
variables, GNP, the stage of development and natural resources, and concluded
that the character of trade changes as the country develops. This is the Trade
Development Cycle. Just as the trade of a country changes as it grows, so does the
pattern of world seaborne trade. Starting with a brief review of the history of sea
trade, we discuss the current regional pattern of trade, taking the Atlantic, Pacific
and Indian Oceans as the framework. We review the countries that lie on their
shores, the goods that they trade and the trading routes between them.
In discussing the geography of sea trade we face a lack of detailed and accurate
information. Although there is no shortage of international trade statistics, most
report the value of trade and few pay much attention to where the cargo came
from. A few tonnage statistics are published by the United Nations and specialist
organizations, but there is no recent matrix of the distribution of trade. For this we
must fall back on the United Nations ‘Maritime Transport Study’ which was
discontinued in 1986. If some of the statistics look very out of date, that is the
reason.
8.2 The Westline theory
When we examine the history of the trading world we find that over 5,000 years,
whether by chance or some deeply hidden economic force, the commercial centre
of shipping has followed a path westward, shown in Figure 8.1. This ‘Westline’
started in the Lebanon in 3000 BC, taking small steps west to Rhodes, Crete, the
Greek mainland, Rome and Northern Italy. About a thousand years ago a bigger
step brought NW Europe into the picture and in turn the Hanseatic towns, Antwerp/
Amsterdam, London and East Coast North America became the leading centre of
sea trade. Finally in the twentieth century a giant step took the centre of trade into
the Pacific as Japan, South Korea, and China have picked up the baton of growth.
Each step along the Westline was accompanied by an economic struggle between
adjacent states as the old centre declined and the new centre of growth emerged. In
this sense the modern trading world is like the wake of a ship that has

255
circumnavigated the world. The maritime tradition, political alignments, ports,
and even the economic wealth of the different regions are the product of centuries
of economic evolution in which merchant shipping has played a major part. In
addition to offering a longer-term perspective on the world of maritime trade, this
history offers a lesson is the long-term dynamics of the economic environment in
which the shipping industry operates.
Mediterranean and Indian Ocean trade before 1000 AD
The earliest known illustration of a ship is a river craft drawn on the walls of an
Egyptian tomb built in about 3100 BC2 Over the next thousand years there is
fragmentary evidence of developing coastal sea trade in the Arabian Gulf and the
East Mediterranean. At that time there were three civilizations located in the valleys
of the River Nile (Egypt), the Tigris and Euphrates rivers (Mesopotamia) and the
Indus river (Harapa). Each river system probably had a population of about three
quarters of a million, more than ten times as great as the population density in
Northern Europe at that time.3 These areas were linked by land, but sheltered coastal
sea routes provided an environment in which maritime trade could develop. Few
FIGURE 8.1 The Westline—5,000 years of maritime trading centres
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
THE WESTLINE THEORY

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
256
records exist of the goods traded. The Mesopotamians exchanged their oil and
textiles for dates and copper from Bahrain and Oman and possibly also traded with
the Indus Valley and Egypt.
By 2000 BC seagoing ships were common in the Mediterranean and the
Egyptians were active traders. However it was the Lebanon, which lay at the
crossroads between the sea and land transport systems, that became the first maritime
trading centre. The city of Tyre was founded in 2700 BC. Its poor, arid hinterland
forced its inhabitants to become seagoers, though the city did not become a major
sea power until after the decline of Egypt seven hundred years later.4 This was the
first real seafaring nation. Lindsay (1874) comments:
The small state of Phoenicia, though insignificant in territory or population as
compared with either Syria or Egypt, possessed in some respects far greater
power than either. Holding, during many centuries, the command of the sea, she
was able, in great measure, to control them as she pleased, and to prohibit their
intercourse with any nations that could not be reached by their caravans.5
By the eighth century BC Tyre had grown to the first rank through commerce. The
Phoenicians controlled the Mediterranean trade routes for three centuries and
became shipbuilders and cross traders (carriers of other people’s merchandise) to
the world. They traded manufactures—glass, textiles, metal work—and produce—
timber, wine and oil—for Egyptian linen, gold and ivory, Anatolian wool, Cypriot
copper and Arabian resins.6 Trade grew as urbanization and industry developed
around the Mediterranean sea.
After the discovery of Spain and the settlement of Sades (Cadiz) about 1000
BC, the Iberian Peninsula emerged as the major source of metal for the ‘developed’
economies of the East Mediterranean, providing the silver, copper, and tin that
guaranteed Phoenician, and in particular Tyrean, commercial domination in the
Orient. On land, the domestication of camels made it possible to establish trade
routes between the Mediterranean and the Arabian Gulf and Red Sea, linking with
the sea trade between the Ganges and the Persian Gulf.
The rise of Greek shipping
When Tyre fell to the Assyrians in 666 BC, Phoenician domination of the Eastern
Mediterranean came to an end and the centre of sea trade moved west. The growth
of sizable towns in the middle of the Mediterranean at Carthage and Syracuse in
North Africa, at Athens in Greece and at Memphis in Egypt meant that the East
Mediterranean was ringed by major towns. As the Phoenician merchants declined,
the more centrally placed Greeks with their market-based economy took their place
as the leading maritime traders. As Athens expanded, the city had to import food to
feed the population.7 For the next thousand years to 400 AD, the East Mediterranean
became an active trading area dominated by the four principal towns of Athens,
Rhodes, Antioch and Alexandria. The latter two grew particularly strong thanks to
their trading links to the East through the Red Sea and the Arabian Gulf.

257
The Greeks traded their wine, oil and manufactures (mostly pottery) for
Carthaginian and Etruscan metals and the traditional products of Egypt and the
East. Initially Corinth was the leading town, benefiting from its position on the
Isthmus, but subsequently Athens became more prominent. Because the rapidly
growing Greek city states were not self-sufficient, grain and fish were shipped in
from the Black Sea where by 500 BC Greece had founded more than 100 colonies.
Carthage held most of the West Mediterranean, including the coast of North Africa,
Southern Spain, Corsica and Western Sicily. However this was not a developed
area and there was little trade compared with the East Mediterranean.
Roman trade and the Pax Romana
As Rome grew in economic and political importance, the centre of trade moved to
Italy. Rome imported minerals from Spain, wheat from North Africa and the Black
Sea and manufactures from the East Mediterranean. Over the next 200 years the
Roman Empire controlled the coast of the Mediterranean and Black Sea, and also
that of Britain. Under the Pax Romana Mediterranean trade expanded, though the
number of towns and trade routes were far greater in the east than in the west. The
conurbations of the east imported minerals from the ‘developing’ countries of Spain
and Britain, corn from North Africa, Egypt and the Black Sea, and manufactures
from the still thriving commercial centres of the Lebanon and Egypt, where the
eastern trade routes entered the Mediterranean.
Towards the end of the third century AD the Roman Empire started to disintegrate
and split for administrative purposes into the Western Roman Empire and the Eastern
Roman Empire. In modern day jargon the Eastern Roman Empire contained the
economically ‘developed’ world while the Western Roman Empire consisted mainly
of ‘underdeveloped’ territories. The Eastern Roman Empire with its new capital of
Constantinople grew into the Byzantine Empire while the Western Roman Empire
slowly declined. For the 500 years after the collapse of the Roman Empire the
frontiers of trade contracted and by 700 AD sea trade centred on Constantinople
with shipping routes to Rome, Venice and the Black Sea. The Islamic Empire
controlled the whole of the southern coast of the Mediterranean and made very
little use of sea transport, preferring to transport goods by camel trains.
Beginnings of North European sea trade
During the middle ages the economy of North Europe began to grow, based
particularly upon the wool industry in England and the textile industry of Flanders.
The Vikings had opened up the trade between the Baltic and North Europe, shipping
out fish, wool, wine and corn. Cologne grew into a major town. As a result the
‘developed’ world now had two economic centres, one in the East Mediterranean,
and the other in Northern Europe. In the absence of a sea route connecting the two,
the shortest and cheapest route for cargo trade between these two centres was to
ship cargo up to Venice or Genoa and carry it over the Alps to be taken down river
THE WESTLINE THEORY

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
258
on the Rhine to North Europe. Venice had a head start in this trade due to its
strength in the Byzantine trade, but Genoa was always a major rival.
The Venetian era
The Venetian Republic, a small city state positioned strategically at the crossroads
of East-West trade, became the next maritime centre. During the 500 years to 1200
AD Venice emerged as the major trading, shipping and shipbuilding centre. It was
helped by the economic decline of the Byzantine Empire. State legislation enforcing
low interest rates for agricultural reasons discouraged the Byzantines from entering
such a high risk business as long-distance trading. Carrying the overhead burden
of the Empire, the Byzantine seafarers could not compete with the Venetians even
on internal routes, and a Venetian network began to replace the native Byzantine
one, an early example of ‘flagging out’.8 By accepting Byzantine suzerainty Venice
was able to monopolize the east-west trade. In return for the shipping services they
procured preferential tax rates, and in 1081 they extracted from the collapsing
empire the right to trade anywhere within its boundaries without restriction or
taxation of any kind. This is a development which will sound familiar to many
western national flag shipowners.
Venetian sea power reached its peak in the twelfth century as North Italy became
a trading ‘hub’. The imports from North Europe were principally textiles, while
North Italy exported high grade textiles, manufactures, and re-exported eastern
produce, brought over land by camel train, to North Europe. However over the
next century Venice gradually lost its ‘hub’ position. There were several reasons.
One was the speed of growth in the West. By 1400 AD the towns of the ‘Hanseatic
League’, an organization of North European towns, particularly, Lubeck and
Hamburg which controlled the trade between North Europe and the Baltic had
became very powerful. The other was the fall of Constantinople to the Ottomans in
1453. By closing the trade routes from the East, it removed Venice’s jealously
guarded monopoly on the trade with India.9 More importantly the loss of the spice
trade, and the potential profits from finding a new supply source, stimulated West
European traders to venture into the hostile Atlantic to search for new routes to the
spice islands. In doing so the centre of trade took another step west.
The voyages of discovery in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries
The ‘Voyages of Discovery’ in the late fifteenth century, turned shipping into a
global business. The new trading world incorporated the Mediterranean, the North
Sea, the Baltic, the North Atlantic, the Indian Ocean and the Pacific. Spain and
Portugal, who were already trading with Africa,10 led the way. In 1487 the Portugese
Bartholomew Diaz tried to reach the Spice Islands by sailing round the coast of
Africa. He rounded the Cape of Good Hope but the storms were so severe that after
making a landfall just beyond the Cape he turned back. Three years later Christopher

259
Columbus set out to reach Japan by sailing West into the unexplored waters of the
Atlantic. In three voyages 1492, 1493 and 1498 he crossed the Atlantic to discover
the West Indies. Then in 1497 Vasco da Gama successfully rounded the Cape,
arriving in Southern India ten months after he left Portugal. Finally, in 1520,
Magellan rounded Cape Horn, establishing a route into the Pacific and
demonstrating the possibility of round the world navigation. In 33 years Europe
had discovered the world.
As a result of these voyages major new trading areas were opened up including
Hudsons Bay and the Gulf in North America; the West Indies; South America; and
the Spice Islands of the Far East, including India and China. The Cape route to the
Spice Islands had the most immediate commercial value because it established a
sea transport route to an area with which Europe already had a substantial trade. In
addition the quality of Far East produce and spices shipped by sea was much better
than by the traditional land route through the East Mediterranean. But the colonists
in the New World needed manufactures and there was a steadily growing trade in
produce to pay for them.
The rise of Dutch shipping
Situated at the heart of the new trading network, the Dutch sea ports of Antwerp
and Amsterdam were ideally located to benefit from this trend. They were at the
crossroads of Europe where the main inland waterway systems which carried much
of the trade from North Italy met the incoming cargoes from East, West and the
Baltic. It was the Dutch who took over from Venice as the merchants, bankers and
shipping ‘cross traders’ of the newly emerging global trading system. Just as the
Byzantine merchants had been priced out of the market by their high costs, so the
North Italian merchants were pushed out by the costs of their goods and services
and the loss of their strategic position.11 By the middle of the sixteenth century
Venetian ships had stopped sailing to the Netherlands and 50 years later the
Mediterranean to North Europe trade was being serviced by English and Dutch
vessels and more than half the Venetian fleet was built in Dutch shipyards.
Between 1520 and 1576 Antwerp was the emporeum mercatorium, the warehouse
and market of world trade. In Antwerp the English merchant adventurers traded
English cloth and wool; the south German bankers (Fuggers, Welsers, Paumgartners)
traded cloth, spices and metals with Germany and Italy; great cargoes of Indian
pepper, nutmeg, cinnamon and cloves were brought by agents of the kings of
Portugal; Spanish merchant ships from Cadiz brought cargoes of wool, wine and
silver, with backhaul cargoes of cloth, iron, coal and glass. Antwerp also became
the centre of finance. The merchants evolved into capitalists, conscious of costs as
well as profits, of turnover as well as mark up. The efficiency of this new society
was apparent in its most essential aspect—shipping. Luigi Guicciardini counted
500 vessels moored before the roadstead in Antwerp.12
Antwerp’s dominant position came to an end in 1585 when the city was sacked
by Spanish troops and the Scheldt river, upon which Antwerp was located, was
blocked by the Dutch. Many of the merchants fled to Amsterdam which rapidly
THE WESTLINE THEORY

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
260
took over as the leading maritime city. Between 1585 and 1620 it became the
centre of a network of world trade stretching from Germany to India. To exploit
the global trade network required access to risk capital. Large ships were needed
for the long voyages; the resources to construct fortified trading posts; and the
military strength to deal with local opposition either from natives or from competing
traders. Individuals could not capitalize ventures on this scale, leading to the creation
in 1602 of the Dutch East India Company. Previously merchants had often banded
together for a voyage, but the capital in these new companies was permanent in the
sense that a participant could only recoup his capital by selling his stockholdings.
The Dutch East India Company was by far the largest with a capitalization of
6,500,000 florins, raised from the public in 3,000 florin shares. The area of the
company’s sphere of operation was ‘westward into the Pacific from the Straits of
Magellan to the Cape of Good Hope’ in which it was to have total administrative
and judicial authority.13 The company was very successful and obtained a monopoly
in the trade with Malaysia, Japan and China.
To carry the growing trade the Dutch developed the first ocean-going
merchantman, the ‘Flyboat’, which was unarmed and cheap to build and operate.
With the cheap freight rates provided by the flyboat, the Dutch captured the bulk
trades in corn, timber, salt and sugar. Both the initial price and the operating costs
of Dutch ships were a good third lower than anyone else.14 Their biggest success
was the Baltic grain trade which increased rapidly as the growing population of
NW Europe created a demand for imports.
British shipping 1660–1940
During the 1600s the Industrial Revolution was starting in England and English
merchants became serious competitors with the Dutch in seaborne trade. The west
coast ports of Bristol, Whitehaven, Liverpool and Glasgow grew rich on the profits
of the Atlantic trade in sugar, cotton, tobacco and slaves. Exports of textiles,
ironware, nails and glass also grew rapidly. In the 1650s and 1660s the English
parliament enacted a series of protectionist shipping laws (The Navigation Act)
designed to exclude the Dutch from these profitable trades. The laws stated that no
goods could be imported into England or any of the plantations of Great Britain
except in British-built ships, owned by British subjects, and of which the master
and three quarters of the crew were English.15 They backed them up by building up
their navy, shutting the Dutch merchants out.
This started the decline of the Dutch maritime supremacy and the rise of the
English merchant marine, though Rogers (1898) argues that the Navigation Acts
had little effect and the real reason for the decline of Dutch trade was that they
became involved in European wars.16 On the east coast the coal trade from Newcastle
to London began to develop and the English merchant fleet grew rapidly. By the
late seventeenth century English economic and naval strength shifted the centre of
gravity of seaborne trade from Amsterdam to London and, by the 1870s, London
lay at the centre of a maritime empire spanning the globe and controlling half of
the world’s deep sea shipping and three quarters of its shipbuilding.

261
East Coast North America was not far behind Europe in terms of economic
development. Steel and heavy industry developed on the North East United States
around Pittsburgh, Chicago, and Detroit on the Great Lakes and down to New York
and Baltimore on the East Coast. Rapid population growth was supplemented by
mass emigration from Western Europe and the East Coast became a mass market.
In the mid-nineteenth century railways and steel steamships reduced transport
costs so much that geographical proximity to raw materials and markets was no
longer a key issue in manufacturing economics. Raw materials and foodstuffs could
be sourced world-wide and manufactures shipped almost anywhere at a cost which
was rarely more than a few per cent of their value. Between 1840 and 1890 the
grainlands of the United States were opened up, providing cheap grain for export
to the industrial towns of the East coast USA and Western Europe. Thus by the
late nineteenth century the North Atlantic was ringed by industry and had become
the centre of seaborne trade, just as the East Mediterranean had done 2,000 years
earlier. This phase reached its peak in the early decades of the twentieth century
when high speed ocean liners linked the major ports of North Europe and North
America, carrying passengers and cargo.
For most of the century prior to 1950 Western Europe dominated the international
maritime scene. During this period Europe controlled most of the world’s shipping,
shipbuilding and liner conferences, a situation founded on the economic lead gained
during the Industrial Revolution and reinforced by the extensive network of trade
with the colonies acquired during the nineteenth century. The world maritime
transport network that emerged was built around the colonial system—carrying
outward cargoes of manufactures and returning with primary commodities.
Liberalization of shipping in the 1950s and 1960s
The decades after the Second World War saw a change in this established pattern
of shipping and trade that had profound effects for the maritime industry. Many of
the most important colonies were given independence, starting a process of
devolution that undermined the secure economic and political framework within
which the European shipping companies had previously operated. Five years after
the end of the Second World War, with the exception of a few enclaves in Asia and
the Caribbean area, only Africa south of the Sahara remained under foreign
domination. By the late 1950s and early 1960s most of Africa had become
independent. At a stroke this development shook up the established pattern of
maritime trade, creating a new independent force in the shipping market, namely
the developing countries, while forcing Western Europe into a different economic
mould.
As the economic world moved away from the colonial pattern towards one
where the developing countries were taking their place as equal partners, there was
a realignment in trade.17 Although the colonial system had disappeared, the trading
links survived and Europe continued to obtain primary commodities from the
developing countries and to supply manufactures such as steel, motor cars and
capital equipment, though increasingly against competition from the more
competitive exports of the rapidly expanding Asian economies.
THE WESTLINE THEORY

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
262
At first these developments had little impact on Europe’s dominant position in
the shipping business. Released from their colonial empires, the West European
economies embarked on a period of post-war reconstruction. Expansion of heavy
industries such as steel and aluminium, combined with the substitution of imported
oil for domestic coal, produced rapidly growing imports, particularly of bulk
commodities. This growth persisted through the 1960s and the upward trend in
imports was reinforced by the switch from domestic to imported sources for key
raw materials such as iron ore, coal and oil. By the early 1970s the European
economy was maturing and demand for raw material intensive goods such as steel,
aluminium and electricity stabilized. As a result imports stagnated, following a
cyclical path, but without the upward growth trend of previous decades.
US shipping in the twentieth century
North America, located across the busy North Atlantic, has played a more subtle
part in maritime trade during the twentieth century. Much of the technology for
bulk shipping, integrated cargo handling, containerization and the mass production
of merchant ships originated in the USA. It was also the US which took the first
step in developing international shipping regulations by calling the international
maritime conference in 1889. US shipowners developed open registries in the 1930s,
and it was the US which initiated tighter anti-pollution regulations in the 1990s.
In the early nineteenth century the USA held a strong position in shipping and
shipbuilding, but the disruptions of the American Civil War coincided with the steel
shipbuilding revolution in the 1860s. There was a rapid and largely unopposed
expansion of European domination, and the USA’s involvement in the international
maritime scene gradually faded. By the early twentieth century the USA had only a
small fleet trading overseas and depended heavily on the fleets of other nations to
carry its foreign commerce. There was, however, a considerable fleet serving the
domestic trades, sailing along the coastal and inland waterways, between the Pacific
and Atlantic coasts, and between the mainland and distant territories and possessions.
The First World War brought home the dangers of relying heavily on the shipping
services provided by cross traders. With the onset of the war foreign vessels were
withdrawn and this had the dual effect of disrupting US trade and showing the
nation’s vulnerability, should it become involved in the war. As a result of this
experience, in June 1920 the Merchant Marine Act, commonly known as the Jones
Act, was introduced. This act had the aim of maintaining a merchant marine of the
best-equipped and most suitable types of vessels sufficient to carry the greater
portion of American commerce and, ultimately, to be owned and operated by citizens
of the United States. The whole operation was controlled by the US Shipping
Board, which was given wide regulatory powers. These included the number of
liner services to be established, the type of vessels used, the frequency of sailings,
and the activities of liner conferences.
During the First World War the United States had run a major shipbuilding
programme, though most of the ships were not actually delivered until the war was
over. Faced with the problem of disposing of the surplus ships, the Shipping
Board offered them for sale to private owners; in so doing it became involved in a

263
shipping subsidy programme that was to persist for much of the next 50 years. By
the mid-1920s it had become apparent that, because operating and construction
costs were so much higher in the US than in Europe, the aim of near self-sufficiency
could not be achieved without extensive subsidy. To deal with this problem, the
US Merchant Marine Act (1928) provided the Shipping Board with the means to
offer loans for constructing new vessels.
This was followed eight years later by the famous Merchant Marine Act (1936),
which aimed to compensate for the uncompetitiveness of US shipping through a
system of direct public construction and operating subsidies. The Act made every
effort to protect the jobs of American seamen by severely limiting the number of
aliens who could be employed in US flag vessels and regulating the hours, conditions
of work and the minimum wages of the crews. It also legislated the practice that all
American exports financed in whole, or part, by any instrument of government
should be carried in US flag vessels.18 As a result of this programme, by 1939 the
US fleet was, according to Lloyd’s Register, the second largest in the world, with
13.9 per cent of the gross registered tonnage.19
The period after the Second World War saw a revival of American maritime
activity.20 For a few years the US merchant marine carried a large part of the
world’s commerce and a much larger share of US exports and imports than it had
since the earliest years of the Republic. However, by the mid-1950s the European
nations had rebuilt their merchant fleets, a process that the United States aided by
selling abroad at bargain prices many of the vessels that had been built during the
war. High American labour costs, the tax laws and the restrictive maritime legislation
encouraged US owners to register their ships outside the US, making the US the
first major maritime region to ‘flag out’ on a major scale (see chapter 12). Over the
next 20 years the US registered fleet steadily contracted, falling to 13.6 m.dwt in
1995, less than 2 per cent of the world merchant fleet while the US owned foreign
flag fleet was 36.6 m.dwt, giving the US a total fleet of 50.2 m.dwt, and a 7.5 per
cent share of the world fleet.21 This left the US a significant shipowner, but still a
net importer of shipping services.
The Pacific trade 1945–75
As the twentieth century progressed the Atlantic trading economy started to mature
and the centre of economic growth moved into the Pacific and Indian Oceans.
Although the industrial growth of Japan started in the late nineteenth century, it
was not until the 1950s and 1960s that the growing importance of Japanese maritime
trade became evident. After 1946 the Japanese economy was reorganized and the
‘Trading Houses’ took over the traditional coordinating role of the Zaibatsu. Lead
industries such as shipbuilding, motor vehicles, steel and shipping were selected
for development and during the 1960s the Japanese economy embarked upon a
programme of growth which made it the world’s leading maritime nation. Between
1965 and 1972 Japan generated 80 per cent of the growth of the deep sea dry cargo
trade.22 By the early 1970s Japan had half the world shipbuilding industry and,
taking account of open registry vessels, controlled the world’s largest merchant
shipping fleet.
THE WESTLINE THEORY

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
264
During the 1970s the Japanese economy moved into a more mature phase and
trade switched away from raw materials trade towards higher value added products.
The next move west was across the Sea of Japan to South Korea which, during the
late 1970s emerged as an aggressive new entrant to the maritime league table,
making a bid for a major share of the world shipbuilding market, and emulating
Japan in the rapid expansion of its heavy industries such as steel and motor vehicles.
It is apparent that the process will not stop here. After two decades of total isolation
and many centuries of restricted contact with the West, in the mid-1970s the Chinese
economy started to ‘open its doors’ to capitalism. There followed a period of
remarkable economic growth, coupled with a move towards a more westernized
capitalist economic system. In the general cargo trades two trading centres were
battling for regional supremacy, Hong Kong and Singapore and the countries
clustering in the area between Singapore and Japan became the new commercial
centre of Maritime trade.
8.3 Geographical distribution of seaborne trade
In the 1990s the volume of cargo traded by sea each year reached 4 bt, distributed
around the world in the manner shown in Figure 8.2. The history of sea trade is
very apparent in the geographical pattern shown in this map. The Atlantic, especially
the North Atlantic, remains the largest trading area with over 50 per cent of trade
(imports and exports), with the main cargo movements generated by the economies
ringing the North Atlantic. However these are mature economies and the rate of
growth is generally rather slow. The Pacific and Indian Oceans have a slightly
smaller volume, accounting for 38 per cent of trade, but are growing very rapidly,
with much of the trade clustered in the Singapore-Hong Kong-Japan triangle.
In Table 8.1 the trading world is subdivided into fourteen areas. Six in the
FIGURE 8.2 World seaborne trade by region 1991
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics

265
Atlantic, seven in the Pacific and Indian Oceans and the fourteenth consisting of
Russia and E. Europe. Unfortunately these regional trade statistics, which are
produced annually by the United Nations, only show the total trade of the country.
Several countries, notably USA and South Africa, have coastlines in two different
oceans, so it is not possible to calculate the exact trade volume in each ocean. In
Table 8.1 the Pacific trade of North America is included in the Atlantic, since this
coastline accounts for the greater part of US trade.23 South African trade is also
included in the Atlantic region, so the totals overstate the Atlantic’s importance by
about 3–4 per cent, perhaps more.
TABLE 8.1 International seaborne imports and exports, by region
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics (1994)
Note: Trade data refer to 1990/91
The countries included in each region are defined in Table 8.3 for the Atlantic
trading area and Table 8.4 for the Pacific and Indian Ocean trading area (see the
end of this chapter). These tables show the trade of each country alongside the
various economic statistics of size, economic activity and natural resources we
discussed in Chapter 7. To supplement this cross section data the growth trend in
the imports and exports of each region in shown in Figures 8.4 to 8.11. Although
these statistics are also compiled by the United Nations, they are published as
regional totals which do not exactly match Tables 8.3 and 8.4. This is not ideal,
but it illustrates one point. Seaborne trade the statistics are often incomplete or
inconsistent, so we must learn make the best of what is available.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF SEABORNE TRADE

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
266
8.4 Maritime trade of the Atlantic and East Pacific
Geography of the Atlantic maritime area (AMA)
For a century the Atlantic has been at the centre of world shipping, with major
maritime economies spread around its rim, particularly in the North Atlantic. It is
well suited to sea trade. The distance between the major industrial economies on
either side is little more than 3,000 miles or about 10 days steaming for a merchant
ship. W. Europe is still the largest trading region, accounting for 25 per cent of
world seaborne trade, while North America accounts for 13 per cent of trade
(including West coast trade). Together, these regions generate enormous trade in
raw materials and manufactures. The four other Atlantic trading areas are much
smaller. The ten non-European countries in the Mediterranean generate 7 per cent
of world trade, the Caribbean and Central America 3 per cent, E. Coast South
America 6 per cent, and West Africa 5 per cent. The trading pattern which has
developed in the Atlantic consists of heavy traffic in both directions across the
North Atlantic, with smaller North-South trades.
In terms of its physical geography the Atlantic is ‘S’ shaped and is narrow in
relation to its length. Within the Atlantic region as a whole, there are 18 principal
oceans, seas, and gulfs which make up the AMA, as shown in Box 8.1. The location
of the larger seas and oceans is shown in the map in Figure 8.3, along with the
more important ports.
The Atlantic is particularly good for shipping because the continents on its East
and West coasts tend to slope towards it, so it receives a large proportion of the
great rivers of the world. This is important for shipping and for the development
of trade because these rivers provide cheap transport into the interior of the
continents. In fact the total area of land draining into the Atlantic and Arctic Seas
is nearly 17m square miles, almost four times the area draining into the Pacific
Ocean and four times the area draining into the Indian Ocean. The ten Great
Rivers of the Atlantic ocean are shown in Box 8.2.
1 North Atlantic Ocean
10
Labrador Sea
2 South Atlantic Ocean
11
English Channel
3 Gulf of Mexico
12
Baltic Sea
4 Caribbean Sea
13
North Sea
5 Mediterranean Sea
14
Black Sea
6 Bering Sea
15
Great Lakes
7 Norwegian Sea
16
Hudson Bay
8 Greenland Sea
17
Gulf of St Lawrence
9 Baffin Sea
18
Arctic Ocean
BOX 8.1 Principal oceans and seas of the Atlantic maritime area

FIGURE 8.3 The Atlantic maritime areas
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
268
The Atlantic is linked to the Pacific and Indian oceans by four shipping routes.
The two sea routes are the Drake Passage around Cape Horn, which connects the
South Atlantic and the South Pacific Ocean and the Cape of Good Hope connecting
the South Atlantic with the Indian Ocean. Both routes represent a considerable
detour for ships trading between the major industrial economies of the North
Atlantic and the economies of Asia. Two man made waterways, the Suez Canal
connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean and the
Panama Canal which links the Atlantic and the Pacific shorten the distance
considerably.
The Suez Canal
The Suez Canal, opened in 1869, runs from Suez in Egypt to the Mediterranean.
It is 100 miles long, linking the Red Sea at Suez with the Mediterranean at Port
Said, via three natural lakes, Lake Menzala, Lake Timseh and the Bitter Lakes.
Unlike the St Lawrence Seaway and the Panama Canal there are no locks. The
canal reduces the transit distance from Kuwait to Rotterdam by 42 per cent, with
similar savings in other Far East transits as shown in Table 8.2. A convoy system
is used with two southbound convoys and one northbound each day. On entering at
Port Said or Suez a ship is assessed for tonnage and cargo. During transit it is
handled by three pilots, one for the approach roadstead and two for canal transit.
Transit time generally takes 13–15 hours.
In 1980 the Suez Canal was deepened and widened to accommodate vessels
with a maximum beam of 64 metres and draft of 16.2 metres, which in practice
means up to 150,000 dwt fully loaded and 370,000 dwt in ballast. As far as the
shipowner is concerned the economics of using the canal is a trade-off between
operating costs, principally fuel costs and canal charges, and the cost of taking the
longer route round the Cape. The toll structure of the Suez Canal is based on the
Suez Canal Net Tonnage (SCNT) of the ship. Tariffs are calculated in terms of the
US$/SCNT, with separate rates for laden and ballast voyages.
BOX 8.2 Major rivers of the Atlantic
Importance to Shipping
St Lawrence ................................................................... Very Important
Mississippi ..................................................................... Very Important
Orinoco ..................................................................................... Minor
Amazon ..................................................................................... Minor
Rio de la Plata ...................................................................... Important
Congo....................................................................................... Minor
Niger ........................................................................................ Minor
Loire..................................................................................... Moderate
Rhine ............................................................................. Very Important
Elb ....................................................................................... Moderate
The St Lawrence, Mississippi, River Plate and Rhine, are major trading
highways and act as interfaces with sea trade

269
The SCNT of a vessel roughly corresponds to the cargo carrying below deck
space, though it is not directly comparable with the gross or deadweight tonnage.
It is calculated by either the classification society or by an official trade organization
who issue a Suez Canal Special Tonnage Certificate.
The Panama Canal
The Panama Canal was opened in 1914. It shortened the distance from the Atlantic
to Pacific by 7,000–9,000 miles (11,000–14,000 kilometres) and had as great an
effect as Suez on world trade routes. The canal, which is about 83 kilometres long,
is entered from the Atlantic at Cristobal and the Pacific at Balboa (see Figure 8.3)
and has a series of locks, the maximum dimensions of which are as follows:
TABLE 8.2 Distances between selected ports (miles)
Although the nominal draft restriction is 11.28 metres (37 feet), the water level
varies from 35 feet during droughts to 39 feet during wet spells. This means that
MARITIME TRADE OF THE ATLANTIC AND EAST PACIFIC

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
270
a 65,000 dwt ‘Panamax’ beam bulk carrier with a 43 feet draft cannot transit the
canal fully loaded—the average bulk carrier with a draft of 37 feet is 40,000 dwt.
Bigger ships often load part cargoes.
Transiting the Panama Canal involves crossing a series of locks and lakes. Ships
entering from the Atlantic terminal sail down a channel to Gatun Locks where the
ship is lifted to Gatun Lake. After crossing this lake the ship enters Gaillard Cut
and runs about 13 kilometres to Pedro Miguel where another lock lowers it to a
small lake. Across this lake at Mira Flores are two locks which lower the vessel to
sea level. It passes through a channel and enters the Pacific. Vessels are towed
through the locks by electric locomotives assisted by ship’s engines and rudder. A
vessel of medium size can pass through the canal in about nine hours. The convoy
system is not employed, but a transit booking system allows transit slots to be
reserved.
The transit charges for the Panama Canal is based on a fixed tariff per net ton
(PCNT) for vessels transiting laden and in ballast. Taking into account additional
charges for winch operation and pilotage in 1996 the rate was $3.97 per ton loaded
and $1.76 per PCNT in ballast.
In 1991 99.5 mt of cargo was transported through the canal to the Pacific, of
which one-fifth was petroleum products, coal, and coke and one-third was grains.
Of the 63.2 mt traversing the canal in the other direction, ores and lumber constituted
about one-quarter of the total, with a great miscellany of commodities making up
the other three-quarters. Asian bound traffic accounted for the greater part with
Japan the predominant destination, whereas the second largest tonnage was carried
from the west coast of South America to the east coast of the United States and the
third largest amount was destined for Europe from South America.
Western Europe’s seaborne trade
Western Europe remains the world’s biggest trading region, accounting for 25 per
cent of imports and exports, though this premier position is gradually being eroded.
It generates a quarter of the Atlantic’s export trade and more than half of its imports.
In 1991 the Western European countries listed in Table 8.3 imported 1.3 bt of
cargo and exported 624 mt. However the long-term trends in Figure 8.4 show that
over the last 40 years export growth has been more consistent than imports which
peaked out in the early 1970s and have grown little since then.
Europe’s seaborne trade is carried on by thirteen countries, the largest importers
being Netherlands (373 mt, though a sizable proportion of the Netherlands trade was
in transit for West Germany), United Kingdom (299 mt), Italy (266 mt) and France
(244 mt). Two others had seaborne imports of around 150 mt—West Germany (146
mt), and Spain (170 mt). The imports of the mature industrial economies of the EEC
and Scandinavia fell during the 1970s. The decline of the United Kingdom from 200
mt of imports to 136 mt was particularly sharp, reflecting the development of North
Sea oil. In contrast, the imports of the less developed countries within Europe,
particularly Spain, Portugal, and Yugoslavia, showed some growth.
A mature, relatively high income, economy, Europe’s resources are fully
stretched, which explains the high import trade. Although Europe has a population

271
of 353 million, a third bigger than North America, and a similar GNP of $6.4
trillion as compared with 6.1 trillion, it has only 17 per cent the land mass (see
Table 8.3). This explains its heavy import trade which is more than twice the size
of North America’s. The cereals crop is typically about 188 mt, compared with
North American production of 334 mt. By intensive agriculture and the protectionist
policies of the European Union the region manages self-sufficiency, with a small
exportable surplus. Raw materials are a different story. Although Europe is well
endowed with all the major raw materials except bauxite, reserves are now depleted
and expensive to produce.
Europe is well served by rivers and ports. Narvik, the most northerly port, exports
iron ore, while various ports in the Baltic handle the trade of Finland, Russia, the
Baltic States, Poland, Northern Germany and Sweden. Forest products, oil, coal
and general cargo are shipped through the ports of St Petersburg, Ventspils, Gdansk,
Rostock, Swinoujscie, Stockholm and Malmo. Moving south, Hamburg and Bremen,
located on the rivers Elbe and Weser serve Germany and its hinterland. These are
important bulk ports, handling grain, fertilizers, steel and motor cars, but in recent
years their real prominence has been in the container trade. In 1993 Hamburg
handled 2.5 million TEU and Bremerhaven 1.35 million TEU, placing them among
the ten most important container ports in the world.
Further south the river Rhine, Europe’s most important inland waterway, enters
the North Sea at the Port of Rotterdam. The Rhine, which is linked to various other
rivers by canals, handles approximately 500 mt of cargo a year. Rotterdam is
Europe’s largest port and one of the busiest in the world. It is located on the New
Rotterdam Waterway and the New Meuse which are open connections to the North
Sea and the Rhine. The port is subdivided into three main areas, Maasvlakte,
Europort and The Botlek. These areas are in turn subdivided into harbours, each
FIGURE 8.4 Western Europe’s seaborne trade
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics
MARITIME TRADE OF THE ATLANTIC AND EAST PACIFIC

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
272
containing deep water specialist terminals handling oil, grain, coal, forest products,
motor vehicles, and petrochemicals. This is also the principal route for containers
moving into Europe. In 1993 Rotterdam ranked fourth in the world as a container
port, handling 4.2 million TEU, while nearby Antwerp handled 1.9 million TEU.
Le Havre is France’s main Northern port, while the United Kingdom is served by
Felixstowe, Southampton and Tilbury.
The ports of Mediterranean Europe serve the industrial areas in eastern Spain
and the industrial belt running from Marseilles through to Trieste in Northern Italy.
Marseilles, Genoa and Trieste are all important ports, handling grain, iron ore, oil,
minor bulks and containers. The biggest container terminals are at Algeciras in
Southern Spain and La Spezia in Italy. Ten countries occupy the remaining Eastern
and Southern coasts of the Mediterranean (see the discussion of African trade on
p. 276). They have a population of 181 million and a GNP of $345 billion. They
export 319 mt of cargo, and import 257 mt (see Table 8.3).
In conclusion, Western Europe remains a major influence on the shipping market,
still generating the largest volume of seaborne trade. With the maturing of the
economy the growth has moved from raw materials imports to a more balanced
trade in manufactures and semi-manufactures.
North American trade
North America accounts for 13 per cent of world seaborne trade. It is the world’s
largest economic region with a population of 280 million and a GNP in excess of
$6.1 trillion, one-third of the world’s wealth (Table 8.3). With 1.9 billion hectares
of arable land, it is six times the size of Western Europe. Cereals are grown in the
centre of the continent and the Middle West is the world’s largest continuous region
of intensively farmed cropland. It is also rich in raw materials. In 1991 it produced
92 mt of steel, 334 mt of cereals, 521 mt of oil, 969 mt of coal, 535 billion cu
metres of natural gas and 95 mt of iron ore. As one of the world’s richest areas it
has a tremendous appetite for manufactures. For many years the North American
market was satisfied almost exclusively from domestic sources, but more recently
key sectors such as motor vehicles and consumer durables have increasingly been
supplied by trade.
North American trade has grown substantially in recent decades. Exports, which
followed a fairly steady growth path from 232 mt in 1965 to 549 mt in 1993 (Figure
8.5), are very resource intensive. Dry bulk exports, which accounts for about 85 per
cent of the total, include coal, grain, forest products, iron ore, sulphur and various
minor ores. North America is the world’s largest grain exporter and in 1991 it exported
about 100 mt of cereals. Access to export markets is helped by the water transport
system, particularly the Mississippi and the Great Lakes, while the West Coast is well
located for access to the rapidly growing Asian market. North America’s second
largest export is coal, mainly from coalfields located in the Appalachians which run
parallel to the east coast and from Canadian coalfields in the west.
North America’s import trade grew from 100 mt in 1950 to 550 mt in 1991.
This trade is dominated by crude oil and products which account for 65 per cent of

273
imports, and dry bulk which accounts for a further 28 per cent. Although the US
is a major oil producer from oil fields located in the south, principally in Texas,
domestic production is now declining and supplies are supplemented from imports.
The trade in manufactures with Asia and Europe is also very important. Over the
last 20 years North America has become the most important international market
for motor vehicles and manufactured goods and in 1993 US and Canadian ports
handled nineteen million containers, about 16 per cent of the world total.24
As a trading region, North America falls into three areas, a hilly east bordering
the North Atlantic where much of the heavy industry is located, a flat central area
given over to farming, particularly grain and a mountainous west which divides
the Pacific coast from the rest of North America. The central area and east coast
are served by two major waterways, the Great Lakes and the Mississippi-Missouri.
In the north the St Lawrence Seaway, which stretches from Montreal to Lake Erie,
gives access from the North Atlantic 2,340 miles (3,766 km) into the heartland of
Canada and USA. In addition to providing an export route for grain, the lakes
provide local transport for the heavy industrial belt of Pittsburgh, Chicago and
Detroit. However the locks can only handle vessels of about 32,000 dwt25 and the
navigation season is limited by ice to the period April to early December, so much
of the bulk cargo is trans-shipped at ports in the St Lawrence. The Mississippi and
its tributaries give the central area, including most of the grain belt, water access
to the US Gulf. The river system carries over 300 mt of cargo per annum. Two
intracoastal waterways link the US Gulf with the east coast, extending from Boston,
Massachusetts, to Key West, Florida, with many sections in tidal water or in open
sea.26
This excellent water transport system makes the east and Gulf coasts of North
America a very busy maritime area.27 In the far north the port of Churchill lies on
FIGURE 8.5 North America’s seaborne trade
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics
MARITIME TRADE OF THE ATLANTIC AND EAST PACIFIC

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
274
the remote south-western shore of Hudson Bay. It is mainly a grain terminal with
a shipping season limited by ice to July-October. Several important east coast
ports are located in the Great Lakes and the St Lawrence. Thunder Bay and Duluth
at the head of the Great Lakes handle grain exports and there is a substantial steel
products into the Lakes. Sept Isles and Bay Comeau in the St Lawrence are navigable
all year and handle grain trans-shipment, iron ore and a wide range of other trades.
Running down the US east coast from the north we find Boston, New York,
Philadelphia, Baltimore, Hampton Roads, Morehead City, Charleston and Savannah.
Since this is a busy industrial area all these ports have frequent container services.
The three largest in 1993 were New York (1.97 TEU), Hampton Roads (0.87
million TEU) and Charleston (0.84 million TEU). The main bulk export volume
is coal shipped from Hampton Roads and Baltimore. All these ports have draft
restrictions which limit access to vessels of 60,000 to 80,000 dwt, thus excluding
the largest bulk carriers and tankers.
To the south the US Gulf is the main highway for bulk cargoes moving into and
out of the United States. Crude oil and products account for 76 per cent of the
import trade, while over 80 per cent of the exports are dry bulk, particularly grain,
oilseeds, animal feeds and coal. There is also an important refrigerated cargo trade
into the Gulf. Cargo terminals along the Mississippi handle much of the export
trade. There are eleven grain export elevators along the river as far inland as Baton
Rouge. The US Gulf is also the largest oil importing area. For historical reasons
the US refinery and distribution system centres on this area. Oil imports are brought
into the Gulf, processed and distributed through the networks of rivers and pipelines.
The LOOP terminal off New Orleans provides the only deep water oil terminal in
the US capable of handling VLCCs. To the east of New Orleans lie Mobile and
Tampa, Florida. Mobile handles coal and Tampa exports phosphate rock. To the
west are Lake Charles, Beaumont, Port Arthur, Houston, Galveston and Corpus
Christi all of which handle oil cargoes. Houston, the largest port, handles oil, grain,
containers and chemicals. Water depth generally limits the size of tanker to below
150,000 dwt, but larger tankers carrying oil from the Middle East trade into this
area by trans-shipping their cargo offshore.
The west coast of North America has a very different maritime character. It is
divided from the rest of the continent by the Rocky Mountains. There are no major
navigable rivers, so inland cargo mainly travels by rail or road. In the far north is
Valdez, where the export terminal for Alaskan crude oil is located. Prince Rupert
handles coal and grain. To the south lies Vancouver, located on the mainland opposite
Vancouver island. This very large port handles Canadian raw material exports of
coal, grain, forest products, potash and other minerals such as sulphur. There are
major coal handling terminals at Robertsbank and Neptune Terminals and many
smaller specialist terminals. Seattle, located 100 miles to the south, fulfils a similar
function for the United States, with major exports of grain and forest products. It is
also the largest container terminal in the area with shipments of over 1 million
boxes in 1993. Tacoma, located a few miles to the south is not far behind, also
lifting over 1 million TEU in 1993. Further south the ports of Portland, Oakland,
San Francisco and Los Angeles (Long Beach) serve the west coast United States.
There is some bulk cargo, with grain shipped out of Portland and oil into San

275
Francisco and Los Angeles, but the main trade is container traffic. Oakland ships
over 1 million TEU, but the biggest trade is through Los Angeles and Long Beach.
Both ports handle over 2 million containers a year, placing them in the top ten
container ports world-wide.
South America’s seaborne trade
Moving down the coast to the south of the Atlantic we find a very different trading
pattern. South America is still principally a primary producing area, generating
about 500 mt of exports and 200 mt of imports each year, as shown by the graph in
Figure 8.6. Over t he last 40 years exports have followed a volatile path upwards,
but since the early 1970s imports have hardly increased. For analytical purposes
the area can usefully be divided into two parts, the Caribbean and Central America
and East Coast South America.
The Caribbean and Central America covers the Caribbean islands and the
coastline from Mexico in the north down to Panama, including the coastal states of
Belize, Honduras, Nicaragua and Costa Rica. The economic data for the thirteen
countries is listed in Table 8.3. Total population is 145 million, with a GNP of
about $0.3 trillion, one twentieth the size of North America. Its area of 267 million
hectares is spread among many islands and the coastal states ringing the southern
shores of the Gulf of Mexico.28
Unfortunately several of these countries have two coastlines and the trade statistics
do not distinguish between them. The trade volume is small with imports of 89 mt
in 1991 and exports of 158 mt. Of the exports, almost 80 per cent is Mexican oil
exported to the US Gulf and to a lesser extent Europe. The growth is explained by
new oilfields developed in the 1970s and 1980s. The oil is shipped principally
from the port of Coatzacoalcos which is the focal point for the major seven oil
FIGURE 8.6 South America’s seaborne trade
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics
MARITIME TRADE OF THE ATLANTIC AND EAST PACIFIC

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
276
fields of Mexico. Other Caribbean exports are bauxite from Jamaica, crude oil
imported by refineries in Trinidad and Tobago and Netherlands Antilles for refining
and on shipment to the United States, sugar from Cuba and bananas.
East Coast South America (ECSA) stretches along the Atlantic coast from
Columbia, Venezuela, Guyana and Surinam in the north through Brazil to Argentina
in the south. This region has an area of 1.8 billion hectares and a population of 240
million, making it similar in size to North America. It is, however, a much smaller
economy. South America’s GNP of $0.6 trillion is only 10 per cent of North
America’s. With so much space and so little economic activity, we would expect
primary exports to predominate. This is exactly what has happened. The trade of
this very long coastline is dominated by exports of raw materials and semi-
manufactures.
In 1991 ECSA exported 358 mt of cargo and imported 108 mt. Dry cargo exports
of 340 mt were made up of iron ore from Brazil and Venezuela, and smaller quantities
of coal, crude fertilizers, forest products, minor ores and crude minerals such as salt.
A declining trend in oil exports was largely offset by a moderate increase in dry
cargo. Brazil is the world’s premiere exporter of iron ore and during the 1960s and
1970s developed iron ore deposits served by deep water export terminals. Iron ore
exports have grown from 7 mt in 1963 to 131 mt per annum in 1995, accounting for
one-third of the iron ore trade. The main iron ore export ports are Tubarao, Ponta do
Uba, Sepetiba Bay and Ponta da Maderia. The area is well served by liner services
linking it to North America, Western Europe and Asia.
West African seaborne trade
Across the South Atlantic lies West Africa. African trade is smaller than might be
expected from such a large continent. Forty countries are engaged in seaborne
trade and in 1993 they imported 188 mt of cargo and exported 468 mt (see Figure
8.7), split between North Africa (60 per cent), West Africa (34 per cent) and East
Africa (5 per cent). Primary commodities dominate exports and three-quarters of
the export cargo is oil from Algeria, Libya, Nigeria and Cameroon. Dry cargo
exports are composed principally of iron ore (Mauritania), phosphate rock
(Morocco), bauxite (Guinea) and various agricultural products.
West Africa stretches from Tangiers to the Cape of Good Hope, including South
Africa. The area covers 1 billion hectares, three times the size of Europe, and has
a population 289 million. However the sixteen trading countries listed in Table 8.3
have a very low level of economic activity compared with the industrial countries
of Europe and N. America. To put this into perspective, their combined GNP was
$206 billion in 1991, the same as the GNP of Sweden. As we would expect, the
trade volume is also relatively low, accounting for 5 per cent of the world total. In
1991 West Africa exported 288 mt of cargo and imported 78 mt. Two-thirds of the
export cargo is oil from Nigeria and iron ore and coal from South Africa. The
remainder is dry cargo exports, mainly iron ore (Mauritania), phosphate rock
(Morocco), bauxite (Guinea) and various agricultural products. Since 1980 the
import trade has stagnated, though there has been substantial growth of exports, as
shown in Figure 8.7.

277
8.5 Maritime trade of the Pacific and
Indian Oceans
Geography of the Pacific and Indian Oceans
The Pacific and Indian Oceans have a very different maritime character from the
Atlantic. One difference is size. The Pacific Ocean occupies about one-third of the
globe. It is twice the size of the Atlantic and the distances are much greater. The
South China Sea, which lies at the western end of the Pacific Ocean, is over 10,000
miles, or 33.6 days steaming at 13 knots from the west coast of South America.
Although there are many small islands in the Pacific, none supports sufficient
population or economic infrastructure to generate significant trade.
The Indian Ocean, which merges into the Pacific, is half its size, with an area of
28.4 million square miles, compared with the Pacific’s 64 million. It is bounded by
India, Pakistan and Iran to the north; Africa to the west; Antarctica to the south,
and the Pacific in the east. This eastern boundary with the Pacific is generally
drawn through Malaya, Indonesia, Australia and the South East Cape of Tasmania
to Antarctica. The six seas of the Indian Ocean, which have a long history of
seaborne trade, are the Red Sea, the Arabian Gulf, the Arabian Sea (between
Arabia and India); the Bay of Bengal (between India and the Thai peninsula); the
Timor Sea; and the Arafura Sea (between Australia and Indonesia).
As a framework for discussing the maritime trade of the Pacific and Indian
Oceans we will use the trade statistics in Table 8.4. In 1991 forty eight countries
imported 1,568 mt and exported 1,482 mt. A map showing the countries and ports
is contained in Figure 8.8. The countries of the Pacific and Indian Ocean which
trade by sea have a smaller area than the countries of the Atlantic (4.4 billion ha
FIGURE 8.7 Developing Africa’s seaborne trade
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics
MARITIME TRADE OF THE PACIFIC AND INDIAN OCEANS

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
278
compared with 6 billion ha), twice the population (3.2 billion compared with 1.5
billion) and roughly one-third the GNP ($5.5 billion compared with $14.1 billion).
Two countries dominate the population count, India with a population in 1990 of
867 million and China with a population of 1,150 million. Compared with the
United States whose population is 253 million, these are massive countries, yet
despite having very old civilizations, neither has in the recent past played a part in
trade which matches their size. In both countries industrialization is a recent
development and their economies tend to be classed as ‘developing’ rather than
developed.
Unlike the Atlantic (and the Mediterranean in earlier times) this is not an ocean
basin ringed by maritime economies. Indeed, the ‘Pacific Rim’ concept is not
particularly helpful in a discussion of seaborne trade. The ‘rim’ countries of West
Coast America and East Coast Africa lack the concentration of heavy industry
which generates the busy shipping activity in the North Atlantic. Rather, industrial
activity is found in the cluster of islands and seaboards spread in a band along the
southern coast of the Asian continent from India in the east, to Japan in the west
(see Figure 8.8). This area, which includes Japan, South Korea, the Chinese coastal
states, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Taiwan, the Philippines, Singapore and
India, has in the last 20 years generated seaborne inflows of energy, food and raw
materials, matched by outflows of manufactured goods such as steel, vehicles,
cement and general cargo. It has no geographical name, but for convenience we
will refer to it as Maritime Asia.
Maritime Asia, which is now the world’s third major seaborne trading area,
comparable in scale with Western Europe and North America, falls into the three
areas defined in Table 8.4. The economic centre is Japan, still the world’s greatest
concentration of maritime activity. To the west lie the economies of S.E. Asia
including South Korea, Taiwan, mainland China, Malaysia, Singapore, Brunei,
Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, Kampuchea and South Vietnam, and South Asia
which includes India, Pakistan and related economies. This diverse group of
countries has a GNP of $4.7 trillion, representing 80 per cent of the economic
activity in the Pacific—Indian Ocean area. Although this falls short of the output
of Europe and America, it is growing more rapidly. S.E. Asia’s cereals harvest of
543 mt in 1991 was roughly the same as USA and Europe combined.
Maritime trade matches up to expectations for an economy of this size. In 1991
the region imported 1,394 mt of cargo and exported 570 mt, much the same as
Western Europe which imported 1,338 mt and exported 625 mt. It imports energy,
food and raw materials, with corresponding outflows of manufactured goods such
as steel, vehicles, cement and general cargo. South Korea, China, Hong Kong and
Indonesia are all major importers. Containers flow in and out of the region along
the trans-Pacific and Europe-Far East arterial routes, many distributed from Hong
Kong and Singapore.
Japan’s seaborne trade
Japan is the economic hub of maritime Asia. Its trade of 800 mt in the early 1990s
(Figure 8.9) makes it the world’s biggest seaborne importer. Supporting this trade

FIGURE 8.8 The Indian Ocean and South China Sea
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
280
is an extensive industrial base. In 1991 Japan produced 110 mt of steel compared
with 136 mt in Western Europe and 80 mt in the United States. All the iron ore and
coal for steelmaking is imported, along with many other raw materials including
steam coal, oil, forest products, grain, non-ferrous metal ores and manufactures.
Over the last 30 years Japan has been through a trade development cycle similar to
the one we discussed for Western Europe (see Figure 8.4). Imports grew very
rapidly during the 1950s and 1960s, reaching 600 mt in 1971. This was followed
by a period of stagnation before growth returned at a more modest rate in the late
1980s. By 1991 Japan’s imports of 725 mt were almost half Europe’s imports of
1.3 bt, but the export trade was still much smaller, only 90 mt. It grew very
rapidly from 4 mt in 1950 to 95 mt in 1984, following which it stagnated. Most of
this trade is manufactures and heavily concentrated in liner and specialist bulk
cargoes, featuring motor cars, steel products, capital goods and the consumer goods
for which the Japanese economy is famous. The stagnation of export volume
reflects the changing pattern of Japanese manufacturing industry with the emphasis
on value added and the location of manufacturing plants outside Japan.
All of the major Japanese ports are located in the industrial belt of Tokyo and
Osaka-Kobe. In terms of cargo handled the biggest, shown in Figure 8.8, are
Yokahama, Kobe, Nagoya, Osaka and Tokyo. These ports have many private
terminals owned by the manufacturing companies.
S.E. Asia’s trade
S.E. Asia handled 443 mt of exports and 590 mt of imports in 1991, roughly the
same volume as Japan. This is a classic example of a maritime trading region. The
trade is generated by thirteen countries (see Table 8.4) circling a 4,000 kilometres
FIGURE 8.9 Japan’s seaborne trade
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics

281
long basin stretching from South Korea in the north west to Singapore in the south
east. South Korea and Japan form the boundary at one end, Singapore and Thailand
the other, while Mainland Asia skirts one long side and the islands of Indonesia,
Malaysia and the Philippines skirt the other. It is hard to imagine an arrangement
better suited to seaborne trade. The trading countries spread around the shores of the
South and East China Seas have large, often well educated, populations, but limited
natural resources. Sea transport provides the coastal cities with easy access to materials
and markets, without the need for major investment in transport infrastructure. The
position which Singapore and Hong Kong have built up as trading and distribution
centres echoes the success of the ‘city states’ of Antwerp and Amsterdam in the
growing North Atlantic trade and Venice and Genoa in the Mediterranean.
The speed with which the trade of S.E. Asia has grown is clearly shown in
Figure 8.10. Import and export volumes are closely balanced and have quadrupled
during the last 20 years. This is clearly a region in the early stages of the trade
development cycle, a fact which becomes more apparent when we review the
individual economies. At the north-easterly end of the trading area lies South
Korea, with trade of 260 mt in 1991. South Korea followed a path of development
in the 1970s and 1980s which closely matched the growth of Japan twenty years
earlier. Like Japan, South Korea focused on steel, shipbuilding, motor vehicles,
electronics and consumer durables, relying on aggressive export marketing of
these manufactures to pay for imported raw materials and energy. Also like Japan,
development was controlled by a few very large corporations, with close government
involvement. Although the economy is at a material intensive phase in its
development and trade is growing very rapidly, South Korea is a much smaller
country than Japan with only a quarter the area, half the population and one-tenth
the GNP. Imports increased from 19 mt in 1970 to 208 mt in 1991, with exports of
52 mt, making Korea an important trading economy. South Korea’s major ports
are Busan, which ranks fifth in the world as a container terminal with 3 million
FIGURE 8.10 Other Asian seaborne trade
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics
MARITIME TRADE OF THE PACIFIC AND INDIAN OCEANS

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
282
lifts in 1993, Pohang where the cargo terminal of the Pohang Steelworks (POSCO)
is located and Ulsan.
To the south east along the coast of the Asian continent lie North Korea, mainland
China, Hong Kong, Vietnam, Thailand and, at the southerly tip, Singapore. By the
mid-1990s mainland China had emerged as a major trading area, though the
industrial activity remains heavily concentrated in the coastal strip, particularly
around Shanghai and Canton. The major ports are Dalian and also Shanghai, which
is located at the mouth of the Yangtze River. In addition to bulk cargoes Shanghai
has China’s main container terminal with over 1 million lifts a year. Hong Kong,
essentially a trading city, lies in the heart of the maritime area. Despite its area of
only 104,000 hectares it generates 26 mt of exports and 62 mt of imports. Vietnam
is only just moving into the development cycle, but Thailand has a small but
rapidly growing economy which generated about 60 mt of cargo in 1991. Singapore
is principally a trading and distribution centre, serving the whole area. Its role in
the container business is particularly prominent, in 1993 ranking alongside Hong
Kong at the top of the world league table with 9 million lifts.
Strung along the south western boundary are Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines
and Taiwan. These are all small but growing economies. There is a major crude oil
export trade from Indonesia. Dry cargo exports include substantial quantities of
forest products from Indonesia and the Philippines, and various manufactures and
semi-manufactures.
Southern Asia
Moving east we find S. Asia Pakistan, India, Burma and various other small
countries. These countries have an area of 0.5 billion hectares and a population of
1.1 billion. They produce 254 mt of cereals, much the same as the US as well as
229 mt of coal and 57 mt of iron ore. However, most of these commodities never
enter trade and the GNP of $297 billion in 1991 was relatively low, about the same
as South Korea. The result is a modest volume of trade—79 mt of imports and 37
mt of exports in 1991—amounting to 1 per cent of world trade. About half of the
import volume is crude oil and oil products, since domestic reserves are very limited.
There are sizable exports of iron ore from India.
Oceania
Oceania covers Australia, New Zealand, and Papua New Guinea. It has a 5 per
cent trade share, due mainly to the raw materials exports of Australia, the main
trading country in this group. In 1991 Oceania exported 342 mt of cargo and
imported 46.7 mt. Iron ore (116 mt), coal (110 mt), and grain (10.6 mt) are the
major exports, though wool, meat and a range of other primary commodities are
also traded. Australia, New Zealand and the smaller countries of Oceania are rich
in natural resources and it was here that Western Europe and Japan found many of
the raw materials to fuel their industrial expansion in the 1960s. The bulk of the
exports are to Western Europe, Japan and South Korea.

283
Middle East
The Middle East has a population of 113 million, more than half of which is in
Iran, and a very large proportion of the world’s crude oil reserves. It is the largest
oil exporting area, with total exports of 520 mt in 1991 and imports totaling 91 mt,
an 8 per cent trade share, mainly due to oil exports. Table 8.4 summarizes the
imports and exports by the nine main countries, while Figure 8.11 shows the
development of imports and exports over the last 45 years. Exports of oil grew
rapidly to reach 1 bt a year in 1973. Following the ‘oil crisis’ in that year imports
halved to a trough of 440 mt in 1985. The fall in oil prices in 1986 stimulated a
recovery in export volume, though exports have still not returned to their previous
peak. In contrast, the import trend has been upwards, stimulated by the sharp rise
in oil revenues after the price increases in 1973 and 1979. During the decades
1973 to 1993 imports quadrupled from 44 mt to 180 mt.
FIGURE 8.11 Middle East seaborne trade
Source: United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics
West Coast South America
This area comprises the Pacific South America states of Chile, Bolivia, Peru,
Ecuador, Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama and El
Salvador. Unfortunately several of these countries have two coastlines and the
trade statistics do not distinguish between the two. These countries have small
economies and few natural resources, at least compared with the countries on the
west coast of the continent. In 1991 seaborne imports were only 18.6 mt and exports
were 41.5 mt.
MARITIME TRADE OF THE PACIFIC AND INDIAN OCEANS

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF MARITIME TRADE
284
West Coast North America
The Pacific coast of Canada and the United States, which have already been
mentioned in the discussion of North American trade in the previous section, forms
a modest trading region, accounting for about 3 per cent of world seaborne trade.
Ports on this coast serve as an outlet for the primary products of North America,
principally forest products, grain, coal from Canadian mines and minerals such as
sulphur from Alberta through the terminal complex at Vancouver. There are also
the major US ports of Seattle, Portland, Oakland, San Francisco and Los Angeles.
These ports are shown in Figure 8.3 and the trade in Table 8.3 under the heading
of North America. Container traffic now forms one of the most important forms
of trade on this coast. In addition to containers shipped to local destinations, the
west coast ports now handle a large proportion of the container traffic from Asia
to the east coast USA. Containers are shipped to west coast ports such as Portland
and Oakland and carried, usually double stacked, by rail to their final destination
in the east. This is significantly faster than the ‘all water’ service via the Panama
canal.
East Africa
Finally we come to East Africa, a region with little trade and a trade share of less
than 0.5 per cent. This stretch of coastline runs from South Africa up to the Red
Sea, and includes Mozambique, Tanzania, Kenya and Somalia. These countries
have an area the size of South Asia, a population of 89 million, and a GNP of $17
billion. Despite their size, none of these countries have strong economies or rich
reserves of primary commodities, so the volume of trade is very small—only 8 mt
of imports and 17 mt of exports in 1991. The only ports of any size are Maputo,
Beira, Dar es Salaam, Mombasa, and Mogadishu. The volume of cargo through
these ports is small, the facilities are primitive and they have little impact on the
shipping market as a whole, other than as a continuing source of work for small
general cargo ships.
8.6 Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union
The East European bloc, comprising the former USSR, and the countries of Eastern
Europe generate only about 3 per cent of seaborne trade. Although the East European
merchant marine has had an important impact in the liner trades, in terms of trade
volume, the region still does not rank as a major maritime power, despite its
geographical and economic size. That lies in the future, perhaps the next step in
the Westline.
8.7 Summary
In this chapter we have built up an economic and geographical picture of the
seaborne trading world. We started with the ‘Westline Theory’, the idea that the

285
centre of maritime trade appeared in the East Mediterranean in 3000 BC and has
moved steadily west ever since. Starting in Tyre, it moved through Greece, Rome,
North Italy, Antwerp, Amsterdam, the North Atlantic and then jumped to Japan
and S.E. Asia. The history of growth and competition as each new area developed
has many similarities with the trade development cycle discussed in Chapter 7,
though on a much bigger scale.
We then studied the geographical structure of the trading world today. The major
division is between the Atlantic and the Pacific/Indian Ocean trading areas. The
Atlantic remains the bigger of the two in terms of trade volume, with imports of
2.4 bt and exports of 2.3 bt. Much of the trade is generated by the mature economies
ringing the North Atlantic which are exceptionally well served by rivers and ports.
The Pacific and Indian Ocean area imports 1.6 bt and exports 1.5 bt. Distances in
the Pacific are very large and much of the activity is clustered in the area between
Singapore and Japan. This region, which covers an area about the size of the
Mediterranean, has become the new centre of maritime trade.
Drawing all this together, the trading world consists of three great economic
blocks strung out along the path of the Westline. Western Europe with trade (imports
and exports) of 2 bt, North America with trade of 1 bt, and S.E. Asia and Japan
with trade of 1.8 bt. Together these areas are responsible for about two-thirds of
sea trade and arterial shipping routes run between them. That is the position today,
but if there is one lesson to be learnt from this chapter, it is that trade never stands
still.
SUMMARY

TABLE 8.3 Seaborne trade and economic infrastructure of the Atlantic and
maritime area 1991

Source: Compiled from various sources
TABLE 8.3 cont’d

TABLE 8.4 Seaborne trade and economic infrastructure of the Pacific and
Indian Oceans 1991

Source: Compiled from various sources
TABLE 8.4 cont’d

