291
Chapter 9
Bulk cargo and the
economics of bulk
shipping
God must have been a shipowner. He placed the raw materials far from
where they were needed and covered two thirds of the earth with water.
(Erling Naess)
Chapter 9

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
292
9.1 The commercial origins of bulk shipping
There is nothing particularly new about bulk shipping. The idea of cutting transport
costs by carrying shiploads of cargo in ships designed for efficient stowage and
cargo handling has been around for centuries. Two thousand years ago Rome
imported more than 30 million bushels of grain a year from the grainlands of
northern Africa, Sicily and Egypt,1 and to carry this trade a fleet of special grain
ships was built. The Dutch ‘fly boats’, the nineteenth century tea clippers and even
the slave ships of the eighteenth century are all examples.
The modern bulk shipping industry can be traced back to the coal trade between
the north of England and London which started in the seventeenth century. Until
mid-nineteenth century the standard ‘collier’ was a wooden sailing collier brig. In
the 1840s, however, the rapidly growing coal trade spurred the shipbuilders on the
north-east coast of England into a burst of innovation, notably the iron screw, a
double bottom for the carriage of water ballast and the location of machinery fore
and aft, leaving the entire hold amidships available for the carriage of cargo. The
ships they built are easily recognizable as close relations of the bulk carriers used
in the 1990s. Commercially the most successful of the pioneer collier designs was
the John Bowes. Built at Palmer’s Shipyard in Jarrow in 1852, she was iron-
hulled, screw-propelled and could carry 600 tons of coal per voyage, compared
with about 280 tons for a good sailing collier. Independent of weather and with
much greater carrying capacity, the steam colliers could make many more round
trips than a sailing vessel. These economic advantages more than cancelled out the
higher capital cost.2 Steam colliers provided the economic base for a rapidly growing
coastal trade between Newcastle and London. Between 1840 and 1887 the coal
trade grew from 1.4 mt to 49.3 mt.3 A few years later in 1886 the ss Gluckauf was
built on the Tyne creating the prototype for the modern bulk tanker fleet.
Since the nineteenth century the volume of seaborne trade has grown enormously
and there has been a corresponding increase in the use of bulk shipping to exploit
economies of scale and improved handling efficiency. Today there is a bulk fleet of
over 9,000 bulk carriers, tankers, combined carriers and various specialist vessels.
Bulk transport has been so successful at reducing costs that coal can be shipped across
the world for much the same price per ton as it would have cost 125 years ago.
Our aim in this chapter is to discuss the economics of the modern bulk shipping
industry, looking at the commodities traded, the particular problems they present
to the bulk shipper and the way in which these problems have been resolved.
9.2 The bulk trades
The definition of ‘bulk cargo’
The term ‘bulk cargo’ can give rise to confusion if the physical and economic
aspects of bulk transport are not properly distinguished. Sometimes the term ‘bulk’
is used to describe commodities such as crude oil, grain, iron ore and coal whose
homogeneous physical character lends itself to bulk handling and transport. This
definition is used by the United Nations to classify commodities in the ‘Maritime
Transport Study’.4 Another definition of ‘bulk cargo’ focuses on transport economics

293
and uses the term to refer to any cargo that is transported in large quantities,
usually a shipload, to reduce transport costs. Under this definition cargoes such as
refrigerated meat, chilled bananas, motor cars, live animals, and logs are classified
as bulk cargoes because they are transported in ship loads. Since many of these
cargoes do not stow easily in bulk carriers, special ships have to be built. Both
definitions highlight an important aspect of bulk cargo. The first emphasizes the
physical handling characteristics of the cargo itself while the second focuses on the
tailored transport operation made possible by high volume. Both are correct within
their own terms of reference. Since this is an economics book, we are more interested
in the economics of bulk cargo, so we will define a bulk cargo as ‘any cargo that
is transported by sea in large consignments in order to reduce the unit cost’. This
definition helps to focus attention on the
ultimate objective, which is to reduce costs,
rather than the means by which that objective
is achieved, i.e. the cargo handling method
or the type of ship used. Since the shipowner
is mainly concerned with ways of improving
the service offered, it is important not to
preempt his decisions by deciding, for
example, that a bulk cargo must be shipped
in a bulk carrier. There may be some better
way of providing the same service.
The bulk commodities traded by sea are
shown in Table 9.1. This table follows the
physical definition, since this is the only form
in which the data is available. In 1995 there
were 2 bt of bulk liquids, 1.1 bt of major dry
bulk commodities and 625 mt of minor bulk
cargo, though not all of this travels in bulk
carriers. This list of commodities is not
comprehensive, but it gives a broad idea of
the commodities most commonly traded in
bulk carriers. As we saw in Chapter 1, each
commodity has a parcel size distribution
function determined by its economic and
physical characteristics, and some
commodities may be shipped partly in bulk
and partly by liner.
The physical character of each commodity
determines the type of ship used, the type of
cargo handling gear required, and hence the
overall structure of the sea transport system.
As far as handling characteristics are concerned,
the commodities shipped by sea are enormously
diverse, but fall approximately into five main
groups, as follows:
TABLE 9.1 Seaborne trade by commodity,
1985, 1995
Source: Clarkson Research Studies, various
THE BULK TRADES

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
294
1
Liquid bulk cargoes which can be stored in tanks, handled by pumping and
transported in tankers. Within this class there are many subdivisions. Of the
liquid bulks, crude oil and oil products are the largest, while some of the
others, particularly chemicals, are obscure and highly complex cargoes. Crude
oil has few special requirements and can be shipped in very large quantities.
Many chemical liquids are toxic and must be stored in special tanks, while
others such as ‘black products’ must be heated if they are to remain sufficiently
viscous to be handled. Liquefied gasses require vessels with refrigeration or
pressurized tanks.
2
Homogeneous bulk cargoes cover a wide range of commodities which are
shipped in large quantities and have a granular or lumpy composition which
can be handled with automated equipment such as grabs and conveyers. For
statistical purposes these commodities are generally divided into the major
bulks and the minor bulks. The major bulks include commodities such as
grain, iron ore, coal, bauxite and phosphate rock, while the minor bulks cover
many industrial and agricultural materials. From a cargo handling viewpoint,
the five major bulks are all homogeneous commodities shipped in large quantities
by sea, and transport tends to focus on economies of scale using standard
general-purpose bulk carriers. In contrast, the minor bulks are enormously
diverse, including many unit load cargoes such as lumber, paper, steel ingots
and bagged fertilizers. They present specialist shipping problems for the shipping
industry, since the cargoes are often of high value, difficult to handle and the
volume of individual trades is often small.
3
Unit load cargo consists of items which must be handled separately. The cargo
cannot just be poured into the ship, as is the case with bulk cargoes. There are
many natural unit loads, of which the most common are forest products (e.g.
a tree trunk, steel products, rolls of paper, etc.) However, a major improvement
in cargo handling efficiency can be achieved by packing non-standard items
into standard units which give greater handling efficiency—for example, ores
and fertilizers may be put in large bags, or sacks loaded on to a pallet.
4
Wheeled cargo requires special ships with access ramps and multiple deck
structures. Car carriers are the main example.
5
Refrigerated cargoes present a special case because of their need for chilling
or refrigerated transport. This is achieved by refrigeration of either the ship or
the container. These trades cover such commodities as meat, fish, bananas,
and various fruits. Some of the cargo is shipped in a fleet of refrigerated cargo
ships (known as ‘reefers’) while the remainder is shipped by container in
container ships.
9.3 The ‘transport system’ concept
A ‘transport system’ is a transport operation which has been designed so that the
different parts of the system link together as efficiently as possible. Since each
commodity and industry has its own particular transport requirements, there is no
single system which is ideal for every situation. There are, however, certain

295
principles which apply to most situations, and which make a useful ‘checklist’
when thinking about the transport system for a particular commodity.
The starting point is to view sea transport as one stage in the transport chain
from origin to destination. Because cargo is transported in separate units such as
shiploads, and because the production and consumption rates at either end may
vary, the storage is almost as important a part of the system as the transport operation
itself. In fact a transport system consists of two components, transport legs and
storage areas. Cargo flows through the system as a series of discrete shipments,
with the storage areas acting as buffers.
A typical bulk transport system is shown in Figure 9.1. It consists of a sea
voyage and two land journeys which could be by lorry, train, conveyor, or pipeline.
There are four storage areas located at the origin (e.g. mine, oilfield, factory or
FIGURE 9.1 Elements in the bulk transport system
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
steel mill), the loading port, the discharging port and the destination. This creates
a great deal of cargo handling. There are eight handling operations as the cargo
moves in and out of the four storage areas. In addition there are four loading/
unloading operations from the land transport vehicles plus the ship loading and
discharge. Between the producer and the consumer, the cargo is handled fourteen
times. No wonder transport system designers are so interested in finding ways to
reduce this cost.
THE ‘TRANSPORT SYSTEM’ CONCEPT

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
296
Four principles of system design
Whether transport is between a coal mine and a power station or a chemical plant
and a fertilizer wholesaler, the aim is to move the cargo as cheaply and efficiently
as possible. Inevitably this involves compromises. There are four ways to reduce
costs. First, exploit economies of scale by using a bigger ship, second, reduce the
number of times the cargo is handled, third, make the cargo handling operation
more efficient, and fourth, reduce the size of stocks held. The problem for the
system designer is that each of these objectives has a capital cost and some work in
opposition. The challenge is to develop a system which gives the best outcome in
terms of the transport user’s priorities.
Objective 1: Economies of scale
One of the fundamental principles of shipping economics is that unit costs can be
reduced by increasing the size of the cargo on the shipping leg. Bigger ships have
lower unit costs, and unit cargo handling and storage are also cheaper at high
throughput volumes. As a result the bulk trades are under constant economic pressure
to increase the size of cargo consignments. A classic example of this evolution is
provided by the shipment of nickel matte (a concentrate of nickel ore) from Canada
to a processing plant in Norway. The change from one transport system to another
was described by an executive of the company in the following terms:
As the size of the trade increased we decided to go from the barrel system to the
bulk system of matte shipping and we proceeded to purchase a 9,000 ton vessel,
which was to move matte from North America to our refinery at Kristiansand
South, and return to North America with finished metal. As part of the overall
operation, we had to provide a storage and loading facility at Quebec City; we
had to increase our storage at Kristiansand, and we also had to consolidate our
storage and handling facilities at a location just outside of Welland, Ontario. I
would say not only the acquisition of the ship, but also the acquisition of the
storage facilities at these various locations, has improved our metal and matte
movements considerably.5
In this case we see bulk shipping as a natural progression in the development of the
business and also the importance of making bulk shipping an integral part of the
whole manufacturing operation. The same process is seen in the steel industry
where the size of ore carriers has increased from 24,000 dwt in the 1920s to 300,000
dwt in the 1990s. A further discussion of economies of scale in bulk carriers can be
found in chapter 5.
Many of the bulk commodity trades discussed in this chapter travel partly in
bulk and partly as general cargo, depending on the size of the individual trade
flow. For example, 50,000 tons of wheat transported from New Orleans to Rotterdam
would certainly travel in a bulk carrier, but 500 tons of malting barley shipped
from Tilbury to West Africa would probably travel bagged on pallets or in containers.
Because this depends on a commercial decision, there is no specific size at which

297
a trade flow ‘goes bulk’. In effect, the smallest practical bulk unit is a single bulk
carrier hold; as the size of parcel falls below 3,000 tons it becomes increasingly
difficult to arrange bulk transport. One expert puts the watershed at 1,000 tons.6
Objective 2: Efficient cargo handling
Cargo handling is a major issue. Each time the product is handled during transport
it costs money. The economic costs of cargo handling can be illustrated with an
example from the grain trade. A 15,000 dwt ’tweendecker discharging in a small
African port might take several weeks to discharge its cargo. Typically, the grain is
unloaded on to the quayside with grabs, bagged by hand and transported to the
warehouse by lorry. In contrast, a large modern grain elevator can discharge barges
at the rate of 2,000 tons per hour and load ships at the rate of 5,000 tons per hour.
With these facilities the same vessel could be handled in a day.
A radical solution is to relocate processing plant to reduce the number of transport
legs. Manufacturing plant such as steel mills can be relocated to coastal sites to
avoid land transport of raw materials. Where cargo must be handled, the emphasis
is on reducing cost by using specially constructed bulk handling terminals. Most
large ports have specialist bulk terminals for handling crude oil, products, dry
bulk and grain. The use of high-productivity cargo handling equipment contributes
to the overall cost efficiency of the operation by reducing the unit cost of loading
and discharging, and minimizing the time the ship spends handling cargo.
Homogeneous dry bulks such as iron ore and coal can be handled very efficiently
using continuous loaders and discharged with cranes and large grabs. Cargoes
such as steel or forest products, which consist of large, irregular units, benefit from
packaging into standard unit loads. In some cases, such as vehicles and refrigerated
cargo, bulk shipping requires the construction of special vessels. For example,
importing cement in bags for onward shipment by rail involves several expensive
manual handling operations. Bulk cement shipped loose in a specially designed
cement carrier can be discharged mechanically into an automatic handling system,
stored in silos and loaded direct into suitable bulk rail cars.
Objective 3: Integration of transport modes employed
Cargo handling can be made more efficient if care is taken to integrate the various
stages in the transport system. One way to do this is to standardize cargo units.
Cargo is packaged in a form that can easily be handled by all stages in the transport
system, e.g. a lorry or rail truck. Containerization is a classic example of this type
of development. The standard container can be lifted off the ship onto the lorry. In
bulk shipping the use of intermediate units such as large bags, packaged lumber
and pallets can be used to reduce handling costs.
Another is to design a system which covers all stages in the transport operation.
This approach is used in many large industrial projects involving raw materials
systems. Ships, terminal facilities, storage areas and land transport are integrated
into a balanced system. The first integrated bulk transport system was probably in
the iron ore trade. Through transport from the iron ore mine to the steel plant was
THE ‘TRANSPORT SYSTEM’ CONCEPT

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
298
planned in detail at the time the plant is built (see page 316). This approach works
best where the cargo flows are regular, predictable and controlled by a single
company, making it possible to justify special investment in ships and cargo handling
equipment. The key word here is integration. What matters is that the transport
system is designed as a whole.
Objective 4: Optimizing stocks for the producer and consumer
The transport system must incorporate stockpiles and parcel sizes which are
acceptable to the importer and the exporter. There are two aspects to consider. One
is the size of the trade flow. Although it would be cheaper to ship manganese ore in
a 170,000 dwt bulk carrier, steelmakers use much smaller ships. This is partly a
matter of annual throughput which does not justify investment in high volume
cargo handling facilities, but there is also inventory cost to consider. Even if the
storage facilities are available to handle 170,000 tons of manganese ore, the cost
of holding stock for a year could well exceed the freight saving. Under ‘just in
time’ manufacturing systems the product should arrive at the processing or sales
point as close as possible to the time when it is used, minimizing the need for
stocks. This approach, which calls for a transport system with many small deliveries
conflicts with Objective 1 which favours a few very large deliveries.
The size of parcel in which a commodity is shipped is thus a trade-off between
optimizing stockholding and economies of scale in transport. High-value cargoes,
which are usually used in small quantities and incur a high inventory cost, tend to
travel in small parcels. This is most noticeable in the minor bulk trades such as
sugar, steel products and non-ferrous metal ores, where physical characteristics
permit large bulk parcels but stockholding practices imposes a parcel size ceiling
on the trade.
The combination of operational and economic factors discussed in this section
can result in many different approaches to the business of shipping cargo in bulk.
Each trade evolves its own distinctive style of bulk shipping operation. For regular
cargo flows such as iron ore, planning the transport system is a routine matter
which generally proceeds very rapidly as the cargoes grow For cargoes that appear
on the market irregularly, optimizing transport is more difficult and generally
proceeds more slowly. For example, grain and shipments are seasonal; there is no
regular pattern of trade since a great deal depends on each year’s harvest. In this
case the immediate requirement is not for an integrated shipping system, but for a
chartering organization capable of obtaining the correct mix of vessels able to
meet a changing pattern of trade. In the following sections we study the more
important bulk commodities shipped by sea to illustrate this point.
9.4 Handling bulk cargoes
Specialized terminal facilities with deep water and capable of handling the various
commodities efficiently play an essential part of the seaborne bulk transport. It is
not possible for a single terminal to handle all types of cargoes efficiently because

299
the depth of water and the cargo handling facilities, the shore based storage facilities
and the through transport requirements vary from one cargo type to another. As we
saw in Chapter 1, modern ports have developed into a collection of specialist
terminals.
Handling liquid bulk cargoes
Crude oil and oil products require different types of handling terminals. Since the
carriage of crude oils uses very large tankers, loading and discharge terminals are
generally located in deep water locations with draft of up to 22 metres. Often these
requirements can only be met by offshore terminals with strong fendering systems
to absorb the berthing impact of large tankers. The berthing arrangements for a
typical offshore oil terminal are shown in Figure 9.2.
The terminal consists of storage tanks on land linked by pipeline to the piers
where tankers are berthed. These storage tanks must have enough capacity to service
vessels using the port. There are two piers with four berths, one with a maximum
size of 65,000 dwt, two 135,000 dwt berths and one VLCC berth. Note also the
finger piers for tugs. Cargo is loaded by pumping oil from the storage tanks to the
ship using the terminal’s own pumping capacity. Discharge relies on the ship’s
pumps. Large tankers generally have four cargo pumps, located in a pump room
between the engine room and the cargo tanks. Typical combined discharging rates
are 6,500 cubic metres per hour for a 60,000 dwt tanker and 18,000 cubic metres
per hour for a 250,000 dwt tanker.
Products terminals are generally smaller and can often be accommodated within
the port complex. Handling techniques are broadly similar to crude oil, but must
be capable of dealing with many small parcels of different product. These include
black oils such as furnace oils and heavy diesel oils; and white oils, which include
gasoline, aviation spirits, kerosene, gas oil and MTBE (a liquid petroleum
feedstock).
Handling homogeneous bulk cargoes
Homogeneous dry bulks such as iron ore and coal are handled very efficiently
using single purpose terminals. The iron ore loading facility shown in Figure 9.3
illustrates the way the industry tackles the problems encountered in transferring
cargo to and from the ship.
Cargo arrives at the terminal railcar reception facility in railcars designed to tip
or drop their cargo into a hopper below the track. From here the ore moves to the
stockpile by wagon or, more usually, by conveyor. The stockpile acts as a buffer
between the land and sea transport systems, ensuring the terminal has sufficient
ore to load ships when they arrive. If stocks are inadequate congestion builds up as
ships wait to load cargo. In the iron ore terminal shown in Figure 9.3 the stockpile
consists of long rows of ore, known as ‘wind-rows’. Commodities such as grain
require protection and are stored in silos.
HANDLING BULK CARGOES

FIGURE 9.2 A crude oil terminal
Source: UNCTAD(1985)

301
Moving material into the stockpile is known as ‘spreading’, while removing it is
referred to as ‘reclaiming’. Both processes are highly automated. The spreader moves
slowly along the stockpile rows, receiving ore from the conveyor and dropping by
gravity on to the stockpile at a rate of several thousand tons an hour. When the ore is
needed the reclaimer, a revolving drum with buckets, moves along the wind-row,
scoops ore from the stockpile and drops it on to a belt conveyor. From the conveyor
the ore is taken to the quayside where it is loaded on to the ship.
Material is weighed before loading or after unloading, to check shipping
documentation, using an automatic weighing machine in the conveyor system.
Sampling is also required to satisfy the purchaser that the material is in accordance
with specifications.7 The ship loader receives cargo from the conveyor and deposits
it in the ship’s holds in a planned sequence (the ‘loading plan’) which avoids
putting structural stresses on the hull. Various loading systems are used. In the
example illustrated a radial arm loader is used. The ship is moored alongside the
loader and the two loading ‘booms’ (i.e. arms which extend over the ship’s hatches)
move from hatch to hatch, loading ore by gravity. Other designs of loader use a
loading arm on rails running alongside the berth. Loading rates of 1–16,000 tons
an hour may be achieved, but at higher loading speeds a limit may be imposed by
the rate at which the ship can be de-ballasted. During loading the boom moves
from hatch to hatch. To allow for temporary interruptions to the loading operation,
for example when moving from one hatch to another, there is generally a surge
hopper in the system.
At the other end of the voyage the ore is unloaded with a grab unloader which
picks material from the hold and discharges it into a hopper at the quay edge, from
which it is fed on to a belt conveyor. The cargo handling rate for a grab depends on
the number of handling cycles per hour and the average grab payload. In practice
about 60 cycles per hour is possible. Grab designs range from light grabs for
animal feedstuffs and grain, to massive 50-ton lift ore handlers. The grab unloader
is used mainly for iron ore, coal, bauxite, alumina and phosphate rock. Other
commodities handled by smaller mobile grabbing cranes include raw sugar, bulk
fertilizers, petroleum coke and various varieties of bean and nut kernels. Pneumatic
systems are suitable for handling bulk cargo of low specific gravity and viscosity
such as grains, cement and powdered coal. Pneumatic equipment is classified into
vacuum, or suction types and pressure, or blowing types.
Handling package bulk cargoes
Handling packaged cargoes provides terminal operators with a different type of
problem. The broad aims are the same, but the operational aspects are very different.
The Squamish Terminals Ltd in British Columbia provides an example of the
type of terminal developed to meet these requirements in the forest products trade.
The terminal handles exports of pulp from British Columbia. Pulp is shipped in
bales which arrive from the pulp mill by rail. The railway line runs into the
terminal alongside the warehouses. Bales of pulp are discharged from train to
storage and then to the ship with a fleet of thirty-four fork lift trucks and fourteen
double-wide tractor trailer units of 34 tons capacity, plus four extension trailers.
HANDLING BULK CARGOES

FIGURE 9.3 An iron ore export terminal
Source: UNCTAD(1985)

303
Three warehouses provide covered storage for 85,000 tons of pulp, which represents
two shiploads of cargo, since the vessels servicing the terminal are 40–45,000 dwt.
However the terminal operators have found that, because the pulp mills have little
storage, any stockbuilding on their part ends up at the terminal. A third warehouse
was built as a buffer for this purpose.
Cargo is loaded from two berths, Berth 1 of 11.6 metres and Berth 2 of 12.2
metres. Because the terminal is serviced by the Star Shipping fleet of geared bulk
carriers there are no need for cranes on the quayside. Ships come alongside the apron
and cargo is loaded with the ship’s gantry cranes. Berth 1 can handle ships up to 195
metres, with an apron 135 metres long, which is sufficient to give access to the cargo
holds. Berth 2 handles ships up to 212 metres, with an apron of 153 metres.
Cargoes such as steel products which often consist of large, irregular units, are
more difficult to ship in bulk. In some cases, such as vehicles and refrigerated
cargo, bulk shipping requires the construction of special vessels. For example,
importing cement in bags for onward shipment by rail involves several expensive
manual handling operations. Bulk cement shipped loose in a specially designed
cement carrier can be discharged mechanically into an automatic handling system,
stored in silos and loaded direct into suitable bulk rail cars.
9.5 Liquid bulk cargoes
The liquid cargoes shipped by sea fall into three main groups: crude oil and products;
liquefied gas, principally LNG and LPG; vegetable oil and liquid chemicals such
as ammonia, phosphoric acid, etc. Together these commodities account for half of
world seaborne trade, with crude oil and oil products generating most of the volume.
For this reason they deserve careful attention. In this section we will review the
history of the bulk transport of oil by sea and the economics of the underlying
commodity trade.
Origins of the seaborne oil trade
Crude oil was first produced commercially in 1859 when Colonel Edwin Drake
struck oil at Titusville, Pennsylvania.8 The first oil cargo was shipped two years
later. Peter Wright & Sons of Philadelphia chartered the brig Elizabeth Watts, 224
tons, to load oil in barrels for London. Oil already had a reputation as a dangerous
cargo and when that ship was ready for sea, her captain could not find seamen willing
to sail with him. He enlisted the aid of a press gang and in November 1861 the first oil
cargo sailed down the Delaware, and into history, with a drunken crew.9
For the next 25 years shipowners searched for better ways of transporting this
disagreeable cargo.10 Barrels, which were big and awkward to stow, were soon
replaced by seven-gallon rectangular tins, packed in pairs in wooden cases. Known
as ‘case oil’, these could be shipped as general cargo and for some years they
became the standard cargo unit. As the trade grew sailing ships were fitted with
tanks, and some with cargo pumps, to carry petroleum ‘without the aid of casks’.
A few such as the Ramsay (1863) and the Charles (1869) were built for the trade
LIQUID BULK CARGOES

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
304
but most were converted. The Vaderland, built in Jarrow in 1872 for Belgian
owners, was the first effort to build an ocean-going tank steamer. It was designed
to carry passengers to the USA and return with oil in tanks.11
The first purpose-built tanker to use the outer skin as the containment vessel
was the Gluckauf, 2,307 tons, built for the German-American Petroleum Company
and launched in 1886. As a safety measure to avoid the build up of dangerous
gases, the double bottom was eliminated, except under the engine room. Several
similar vessels, including the Bakuin built for Alfred Stuart and the Loutsch were
launched later in the year.12 The savings by shipping bulk (four shillings a barrel)
were so great that within three years half of the oil imported into the UK came in
bulk.13 Thus started the era of bulk oil transport. From twelve bulk tankers in
1886, the fleet grew to ninety tankers operating in the Atlantic in 1891.
The sea transport of oil 1890–1970
Once the ships were available the newly emerging oil companies, who were deeply
involved in distribution, were quick to see the advantages of bulk transport. In the
late 1880s the US Standard Oil, the world’s biggest oil company, entered the tanker
business.14 They set up the Anglo-American Oil Co Ltd and, in a typical grand
gesture, purchased sixteen tankers including the Duffield and the Gluckauf.15 At
about the same time Marcus Samuel, who was distributing Russian case oil in the
Far East, decided to build a fleet of tankers to transport Russian oil in bulk to the
Far East, thus undercutting Standard Oil.16 The first was the Murex, delivered in
1892 and by the end of 1893 ten ships had been launched for the Samuels.17 In
1892 the Suez Canal permitted tankers to pass through, reducing the voyage to a
competitive distance. Oil was loaded at the Black Sea port of Batum and delivered
by tanker to the Far East. To improve profits, the tankers carried a backhaul of
general cargo. After discharging oil at Bombay, Kobe, or Batavia, the tanks were
steam cleaned, whitewashed and loaded with a backhaul cargo of tea, cereals or
rice. In 1897 Shell Transport & Trading was formed and in 1907 Anglo-Saxon
Petroleum Co. Ltd was formed by merging the Shell and Royal Dutch fleets, creating
a total fleet of thirty-four ships.
Over the next 50 years the oil trade grew steadily, reaching 35 mt in 1920 and
182 mt in 1950. Trade was controlled by the ‘Oil Majors’ and transport dominated
oil industry economics. In 1950 the cost of a barrel of oil in the Middle East was
about $1. It cost another $1 to ship it to Western Europe, so transport accounted for
about half the CIF price. Every cent shaved off transport costs contributed to
profitability. Shipping was a ‘core’ business for the oil companies, who developed
a policy of balancing owned ships with time charters to independent tanker owners.
In the 1950s and 1960s the growth rate of trade increased to 8.4 per cent per
annum growth, compared with 5.9 per cent per annum previously and since the
Middle East was the marginal supply source, ton miles grew even faster. Planning
the supply of transport became a major part of the oil industry’s business which
they tackled it with characteristic thoroughness. In the 1950s the ‘Oil Majors’ set
about creating a sophisticated machine for cutting the cost of oil transport. Their
three guiding principles were:

305
1
Economies of scale. Throughout the 1950s and the 1960s each generation of
tankers was bigger than the last. The size increased from 17,000 dwt in 1950
to the first VLCC in 1966 and the first ULCC in 1976. The economics were
simple and clearcut. In 1968 an 80,000 dwt tanker such as the Rinform cost
about 27s.5d per ton of oil to make the round trip from Rotterdam to Kuwait.
On the same voyage a 200,000 dwt vessel returning via the Cape could do the
voyage for 18s.1d, a 33 per cent saving.18
2
Transport planning. The majors developed a logistic network which used tankers
to their maximum efficiency. They sailed with a full cargo; waiting time was
negligible; regular maintenance minimized breakdown; and when problems
occurred they were smoothly dealt with through inter-company cooperation.
By the early 1970s the transport performance of the fleet was within a few per
cent of the theoretical optimum.
3
Subcontracting. To avoid corporate overheads and to spread the risk, a large
part of the fleet was subcontracted to independents, with Greeks and Norwegians
serving the Atlantic market and Hong Kong serving Japan. To begin with in
the 1950s the time charters were generally 5–7 years, but by the time VLCCs
were being ordered in the 1960s 15 or even 20 year charters were not
uncommon. By the end of the 1960s the oil companies owned about 36 per
cent of the tanker fleet; they time-chartered another 52 per cent; and they
topped up their seasonal requirements from the spot market which accounted
for about 12 per cent of supply. The spot market was inhabited by the small,
uneconomic elderly tankers and a few speculators trading modern tonnage
through the boom and bust cycles.
This ‘charter back’ policy (shikumisen in Japan) enabled independent tanker owners
to build up their tanker fleets by borrowing against the security of the oil company
charter. By July 1971 there was a fleet of 178 m.dwt available for oil transport. The
oil companies owned 48 m.dwt (26 per cent), with an additional 79.8 m.dwt (45 per
cent) on time charter from independents. As fall back, there was 19.5 m.dwt (11 per
cent) of the independent fleet trading spot, and 17m dwt of combined carriers.
Independent tankers thus outnumbered the oil company ships by a ratio of two
to one. They made their profits by careful management and asset appreciation
rather than speculation.19 However the oil companies were hard taskmasters. The
charter rates they negotiated usually left little margin for error. As inflation and
currency volatility developed in the late 1960s, some tanker owners became
disenchanted with their role as subcontractors, especially as some owners seemed
to be doing spectacularly well on the spot market.
Growth of the tanker ‘spot market’ 1975–95
In the 1970s the factors that had worked so positively in favour of an integrated
transport operation were reversed. Everything went wrong. Demand collapsed,
supply got out of control, and the oil companies decided oil transport was no longer
a core business and reduced their exposure to it. In the next 20 years the transport
of oil changed from carefully planned industrial shipping to a market operation.
LIQUID BULK CARGOES

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
306
As a result the independent tanker fleet, which in 1973 was mainly trading on time
charter to the oil companies, gradually transferred to the spot market. By the early
1990s over 70 per cent of this fleet was trading spot, compared with only about 20
per cent in the early 1970s (See Figure 3.2).
This fundamental change in the organisation of oil transport was precipitated by
a period of volatility in the oil trade.20 Trade had reached 300 mt in 1960, and peaked
at 1,530 mt in 1978. From there it fell to 960 mt in 1983, then grew to 1,480 mt in
1995 (Figure 9.4). The fall in the oil trade in the early 1980s had three causes. First,
the European and Japanese energy markets were maturing. By the 1970s the transition
from coal to oil was over, and lower growth was inevitable. Second, there were two
deep economic depressions, one in the mid-1970s and the other in the early 1980s.
Third, higher oil prices, which reached $30 per barrel in 1980, meant that other fuels
were substituted for oil and fuel-saving technology became viable. In particular, the
power station market was lost to coal and technology reduced oil consumption in
other areas.21 By the end of the 1980s the oil trade had changed from a predictable
trade for which transport was carefully planned by the oil companies to a volatile and
risky business in which traders played a substantial part and transport was, to a large
extent, left to the market-place to manage.
Geographical distribution of the oil trade
The geographical location of oil supplies plays an important part in determining
the number of tankers needed to carry the trade. The location of the world’s major
oil exporting countries is shown in Figure 9.5. The largest known source of crude
oil outside the consuming areas is the Middle East. This region has 60 per cent of
FIGURE 9.4 Crude oil imports by region 1962–96
Source: Fearnleys World Bulk Trades 1995 and earlier editions

FIGURE 9.5 Major crude oil exporters 1995
Source: BP, Statistical Review of World Energy Industry
Note: The numbers on the graph show oil production in 1995

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
308
world proven crude oil reserves and has in the past acted as marginal supplier of
oil to the West. The second major group of oil producers are clustered around the
North Atlantic in the US Gulf, Mexico, Venezuela, West Africa, North Africa and
the North Sea. Finally, there are a few smaller producers in SE Asia, notably
Indonesia and China. Since the Middle East lies further from the market than most
of the other smaller export oil producers—it is 12,000 miles around the Cape to
Western Europe and over 6,000 miles to Japan—the ship demand depends upon
the source from which oil is obtained and the route taken by the oil to market.
During the 1960s, the share of Middle East oil in the total trade grew very
rapidly and the average haul for crude oil increased from 4,500 miles to over
7,000 miles, giving a massive boost to ship demand. From a peak of 7,000 miles
in the mid-1970s the average haul fell to a trough of 4,450 miles in 1985. This fall
was partly driven by increased short haul oil production. North Sea production
started in 1975 and rose to 5.5 million bpd. At about the same time the Alaska
North Slope came on stream, cutting US imports. Other factors contributing to the
fall in ton miles were the re-opening in 1975 of the Suez Canal which had been
closed since 1967; the Sumed Pipeline which eventually carried 1.5 million bpd of
oil to the Mediterranean; and in the 1980s the Dortyol pipeline built during the
Iran-Iraq war diverted 1.5 million barrels of AG oil to the Eastern Mediterranean.
As a final complexity, in the early 1980s Saudi Arabia and Kuwait opened large
refineries, with capacity to export 100 mt of oil as products, not as crude. Taken
together, over a period of fifteen years these developments probably cut long haul
crude movements by about 10 million barrels per day.
In short, the position of the Middle East as marginal or ‘swing’ oil supplier and
its geographical location relative to the other oil exporters creates a mechanism
that we can refer to as the ‘ship demand multiplier’—when oil exports are growing,
the market share of the Middle East increases and the average haul rises; when the
demand for imports is declining, the process goes into reverse. This means that
upswings and downswings in the oil trade are intensified in terms of their impact
upon the shipping market, and that predicting the demand for oil tankers must take
account of the supply pattern for oil as well as the import requirement of each
region.
Finally, we must say something about the political aspects of the oil trade. Oil
is a strategic business and during the last two or three decades the oil trade has
provided a fine example of market economics, operating within a political
framework. From a commercial perspective, although the seven major oil companies
still dominate the oil industry, their role in transport is much less prominent than
it was. Until the 1970s they were responsible for something like 80 per cent of all
oil processing in the world and they operated or controlled, through long-term
charters, most of the seaborne oil transport.22
Since the 1970s the institutions which control oil during the transportation
operation have changed significantly and the role of the seven ‘oil majors’ has
been diluted. Oil producers, especially in the Middle East, now actively market
their oil through distribution organizations in the consuming markets and several
have built their own tanker fleets. New oil companies have emerged in the rapidly
growing Asian markets, with their own transport policies. Finally, as the oil market

309
has become more volatile the prominance of oil traders, who act as intermediary
between the producer and the refinery, has become more prominent. They now
often own the oil during shipment and because their interests are very different
from those of the traditional oil majors, this has altered the supply side of the
business.
The oil transport system
Since crude oil is by far the largest seaborne commodity trade, and practically all
of it travels by tanker, a large and sophisticated industry has grown up specializing
in the transportation of crude oil by sea. Crude oil for export is usually transported
from the oilfield to the coast by pipeline. A pipe of small diameter is attached to
each producing well and a network of these pipes connects to bulk collecting stations
which feed into large terminal areas with storage tanks capable of holding hundreds
of thousands of barrels. The oil is then loaded into tankers and shipped to its
destination where it is off-loaded into another bulk terminal. A typical VLCC would
carry about 280,000 tons of oil, at a draught of about 21 metres, a speed of 15
knots and with a pumping capacity of 18,000 tons per hour. The larger ULCC
might carry 350,000 tons of oil with a loaded draught of 22 metres and a discharge
pumping capacity of 22,000 tons per hour.
Such large vessels require a dedicated port infrastructure and the terminals used
in the oil trade, which we discussed in section 9.4, are often in remote locations,
consisting of a tank farm for temporary oil storage and a jetty or single buoy mooring
projecting into deep water where large tankers can load cargo. For example, Ras
Tanura the main export terminal of Saudi Arabia, has a series of jetties built offshore.
From the discharge terminal the oil is delivered direct to a refinery, or to a crude oil
terminal linked to refineries by a pipeline. In the early days of the oil industry
much crude oil moved by rail tank car, but today pipelines, barges and ships
dominate petroleum handling.
The deep draught of large tankers places restrictions on their use of key shipping
lanes such as the Straits of Dover, the Straits of Malacca and the Suez Canal. The
Straits of Dover, for instance, have a maximum permissible draught of around 23–
25 metres, which is on the margin for larger-size ULCCs. In the Straits of Malacca,
on the route between the Middle East and Japan, the maximum draught of 18
metres precludes the larger ULCCs. However, from the shipping industry’s point
of view, the draught restrictions on the Suez Canal were the most important. Until
the mid-1950s the Suez Canal was the main route for crude oil shipped from the
Middle East to Western Europe. At that time the draught was 11 metres, restricting
the canal to loaded vessels of less than 50,000 dwt. The closure of the canal during
the Six Day War in 1967 coincided with the trend to build VLCCs for the oil trade
and as a result the imports of Western Europe and the United States from the Middle
East were diverted around the Cape.
After the Suez Canal was reopened in 1975, it was deepened to 16.2 metres,
allowing vessels of up to 150,000 dwt to transit full loaded, or larger vessels in
ballast. As a result, shipments of oil through the canal edged up from 30 mt in
LIQUID BULK CARGOES

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
310
1976 to about 40 mt in 1995, but remained well below the peak of 167 mt achieved
before the canal was closed in 1967. This reflects the availability of bigger ships
which cannot transit the canal fully loaded. One effect of the reopening of the Suez
Canal was to generate a demand for intermediate-sized tankers of 100,000–150,000
dwt
The seaborne trade in oil products
In both economic and shipping terms the oil products trade is very different from
crude oil. The trade consists of the products of the oil refining process, which in
shipping terms can be loosely classified into two categories, clean and dirty products.
Clean products consist of the lighter distillates, principally kerosene and gasoline,
which are usually shipped in vessels with coated tanks and require care in cleanliness
of storage tanks. Dirty products include the lower distillates and residual oil, which
can generally be shipped in conventional tankers, though the low viscosity
sometimes necessitates steam-heating coils in the cargo tanks.
In 1995, about 493 mt of oil products were shipped by sea, about half of which
were clean products and the other half dirty products. In contrast to the crude oil
trade, the volume of oil products trades has been fairly stable for several decades,
though at regional level there has been great change (Figure 9.6). Explaining these
changes is a good deal more complex than the crude oil trade. The oil products
trade has a complex economic structure, arising from the fact that oil products
may be traded by sea for several different reasons:
FIGURE 9.6 Oil product imports 1963–95
Source: BP, Statistical Review of World Energy Industry

311
•
Refinery location. If the oil refinery is located at the source of the oil or some
intermediate point on the sea route, then the oil products will need to be
shipped on by sea to the final market.
•
Balancing trades. The mix of products refined from a barrel of oil does not
always meet the precise market structure of the market adjacent to the refinery.
For this reason there is a constant movement of specific oil products from
areas of surplus to areas of shortage.
•
Deficit trade. Local shortages of refined products may occur either because
demand grows faster than refining capacity can be expanded, or because the
market is not sufficiently large to support a major oil refinery, as may happen
in some developing countries. In these circumstances the import trade will
take the form of oil products rather than crude oil.
The main importers of products are shown in Figure 9.6. Until the 1950s the two
main oil trades were from refineries in Venezuela and the Caribbean to the United
States and from the Middle East to Western Europe. The Caribbean to United
States trade built up to a peak of 150 mt a year in the early 1970s (see Figure 9.6),
then fell sharply to 80 mt as the US adjusted its domestic refining capacity. Unlike
the US, European oil imports were mainly shipped as crude oil rather than products.
Products imports fell to a trough of 35 mt in 1971, then revived to about 80 mt in
the 1980s, compared with over 400 mt of crude imports. The explanation of this
trade pattern can be found in a combination of technical, economic and political
factors.
On the technical front, the 1950s brought refining techniques which enabled
the mix of oil products from the refining process to be more closely linked to the
local market. In addition, the amount of waste to be disposed of from the cargo of
crude oil was greatly reduced, an important factor on the long sea journey from the
Middle East to Western Europe. Finally, politics played a part, since nationalization
of the oil refineries of the Anglo Iranian Oil Company in 1951 provided an incentive
to locate refineries in the more politically secure consuming countries. As oil
became more important to the economies of Western Europe, so the degree of risk
that they were prepared to accept became smaller. Thus ‘there was an escalating
interest in the development of market-based refineries, and by the end of the
1950s Western Europe had developed sufficient refinery capacity to meet its main
oil products needs’.23
The changing political and economic climate in the oil industry after the 1973
oil crisis brought a new dimension to the products trade. Several oil producers
became interested in investing oil revenue in refineries, which would enable them
to export oil products, thus increasing their value-added. The most prominent was
Saudi Arabia, which in the late 1970s built two 25 million ton refineries, both
aimed at the export market. In contrast, the US oil industry found itself with surplus
refining capacity and started to withdraw from the refining operations in the
Caribbean. The main source of trade growth came from the Asian economies
whose imports grew rapidly during the decade of industrialization from 1985 to
1995 (Figure 9.6).
LIQUID BULK CARGOES

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
312
The transport of oil products
The transport system for products is more complex than crude oil. In the smaller
high value products trades the volume of cargo is not sufficient to justify the use of
very large ships or the storage and handling facilities which this would require.
Petroleum products are generally shipped in tankers of 6,000–60,000 dwt, often
with epoxy coated tanks. These ships are designed with cargo handling systems
which enable them to carry several different types of product on the same voyage.
The transport of oil products should be distinguished from the more specialized
trade in small liquid parcels such as chemical and vegetable oils. These appear on
the market in quantities which are large enough to make them prohibitively
expensive to ship in drums or purpose-built tankers, but not in sufficiently large
packages to justify the charter of the whole ship. This led to the development of
‘parcel’ tankers which contain many segregated tanks, sometimes 30–40, with
separate pumping arrangements, some of them with special coatings to resist toxic
liquids. This enables the shipowner to load many different cargoes of liquid into a
single vessel.
A transport operation of this type is highly complex, involving carefully planned
investment decisions supported by a high professional operating service to schedule
the cargo to ensure that high utilization levels are achieved. For this reason, the
carriage of chemicals and light oils cargoes is a specialist business, and it is certainly
one which requires professional skill and experience.
The liquefied natural gas (LNG) trade
A highly specialized late-comer to the bulk liquid shipping business was the liquefied
natural gas (LNG) trade. LNG is mainly produced from dedicated gas fields and is
transported at approximately atmospheric pressure at a temperature of -161°C.24
The hazardous nature and the very low temperatures of LNG requires special
facilities isolated from the rest of the port. Surfaces in contact with LNG must be
manufactured from alloys to withstand very low temperatures, as ordinary steel
would become brittle. The first commercial LNG trade started in 1964 between
Algeria and Canvey Island in the UK using two specially built ships—the Methane
Princess and the Methane Progress. This was followed shortly afterwards by a
major scheme for the export of LNG from Brunei to Japan and a number of other
schemes to export natural gas from gasfields in Algeria, Indonesia, Abu Dhabi and
Malaysia. Since that time the trade has grown steadily doubling from 48 billion
cubic metres in 1984 to 88 billion cubic metres in 1994 (Figure 9.7).
Special installations are required for liquefaction, storage, refrigeration, loading,
unloading and regasification of LNG. Depending upon distance from the gas
production area and other factors not all of these processes may be carried out at
the terminal. Insulated pipelines and insulated storage tankers with refrigeration
plant are required for storing LNG in the terminal. Typical export storage tanks
have a capacity of 300,000 barrels, or 47,750 cubic metres. LNG is shipped in

313
specially built vessels with heavily insulated cargo tanks which keeps the gas liquid
during its voyage. A typical size for a large LNG carrier is 125,000 m3.
The liquified petroleum gas trade (LPG)
LPG is mainly produced from oilfields—it is the gas that is often flared off—
though small quantities are produced in the refining process. Like LNG, LPG
must be liquefied for seaborne transportation; this is achieved by either cooling it
to a temperature of around—50°C or subjecting it to 10–12 bar pressure. Vessels
used for the carriage of LPG are also used in the chemical gas trades for the
carriage of ammonia, etc.
LPG transport by sea requires a substantial investment in liquefaction and cargo
handling facilities as well as the construction of specialist LPG tonnage. In economic
terms, however, the trade is fundamentally different because the volume of
production is linked to the volume of crude oil output. As a result, the quantities of
LPG reaching the export market are not directly controlled by the supplier. The
export trade is mainly from OPEC countries, particularly Kuwait and Saudi Arabia,
to Japan, Western Europe and the United States.
Chemical gases (e.g. liquefied ammonia)
Ammonia is a colourless anhydrous gas, with a bitter smell. While ammonia is not
easily inflammable, when mixed with air or with oxygen it can form an explosive
mixture. Anhydrous ammonia contains nitrogen, which is one of the basic elements
FIGURE 9.7 World LNG imports 1984–94
Source: Clarkson Research Studies
LIQUID BULK CARGOES

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
314
in fertilizers. Liquid ammonia is used primarily to produce nitrate fertilizers
(ammonia nitrate) or compound fertilizers (granulated compound fertilizers).
Ammonia gas becomes liquid when cooled to -33°C at atmospheric pressure. Liquid
ammonia is transported by special gas carriers of 3,000–40,000 dwt. Typically
cargo is delivered to land based tanks is by means of the ship’s pumps with a
discharge rate of 600 tons per hour with 6-inch articulated arms. One or several
such arms connect the ship’s intake with the thermally insulated land based pipes.
Other chemical gases transported by sea as liquids are ethylene (-104°C),
Butadiene (-5°C), ethane (-89°C) and propylene (-48°C).
Heavy chemicals (e.g. phosphoric acid)
Phosphoric acids made from natural phosphates are green or brown sticky liquids,
are corrosive for metals such as iron, zinc and aluminium. Stainless steel, copper,
bronze, brass, some plastics, rubber and acid proof paints are resistant to phosphoric
acid at normal temperatures. While phosphoric acids are non-inflammable and
non-explosive compounds, they react with many metals by releasing hydrogen
which can result in explosions and fires. It is very dense with a specific gravity of
1.8. Other heavy inorganic mineral acids with similar properties are caustic soda
liquor (SG 1.5), sulphuric acid (SG 1.7–1.8) and nitric acid (SG 1.5).
Transportation takes place in special vessels up to 45,000 dwt through stainless
steel pipes. Typical handling rates are 600 tons per hour. In port the acids are
stored in steel cisterns with an inner lining of rubber (self vulcanizing 4mm thick
rubber sheets). The cisterns stand in watertight concrete tanks that can hold the
contents of a full cistern in case of leakage or accident.
9.6 The five major dry bulks
If oil is the energy of modern industrial society, the five major bulks are the
building blocks from which it is constructed. Iron ore and coal are the raw materials
of steelmaking and steel is the principal material used in the construction of industrial
and domestic buildings, motor cars, merchant ships, machinery and the great
majority of industry products. The staple foods of the modern industrial society
are bread and meat, both of which require large quantities of grain—for baking
and as the raw material of modern factory farming for the production of meat.
Bauxite and alumina are the raw materials of aluminium making, the second most
important structural metal in modern industrial society, while phosphate rock is
the principal bulk fertilizer used in crop production. It follows that in discussing
the five major bulk trades we are concerned with the whole material development
of the world economy that uses these materials.
Because of their volume, the five major bulk trades are the driving force behind
the dry bulk carrier market. In 1995 the trade totalled 1 bt, accounting for more
than one-quarter of total seaborne cargo, and in terms of tonnage about half the
crude oil trade. The tonnage of cargo in each commodity and its historic growth
are shown in Table 9.2.

315
It is immediately apparent from the historical trade statistics that each of these
five trades followed its own distinctive growth pattern during the three decades
1965–1995. Iron ore grew rapidly until the mid-1970s, after which the trade has
grown slowly. Coal followed a similar pattern until 1975, but continued to grow.
It more than doubled between 1975 and 1985 and increased by 50 per cent between
1985 and 1995. Grain grew fairly steadily until 1985, then stagnated, though with
substantial year-to-year fluctuations. Bauxite grew rapidly during the 1960s, but
stagnated during the 1970s, then revived, increasing by 25 per cent between 1985
and 1995. Phosphate rock was unique in showing almost no growth over the 30
years. It grew, then declined.
Such major changes in the pattern of growth of the main dry bulk commodity
trades are clearly of great importance to the shipping industry. One of the principal
reasons for studying commodity trade economics is to explain why such changes
take place. As we shall see in the following brief review of the five major bulk
trades, there is no simple pattern. Each commodity has its own distinctive industrial
characteristics, growth trends and impact upon the dry bulk shipping industry.
The seaborne iron ore trade
Iron ore is the largest of the five major bulk commodity trades and the principal
raw material of the steel industry. Like crude oil, the iron ore trade is determined
by the location of the processing plant in relation to raw material supplies. During
the Industrial Revolution, steel plants were located on sites close to major sources
of raw materials, notably iron ore, coal and limestone. Access to these materials
was a major concern in the economics of the steel industry. However, as transport
technology developed it became clear that the distance over which the materials
were shipped was less important than the freight-rate structure, the transport service
and the quality of the raw materials.25
By the early twentieth century, developments in bulk shipping technology meant
that steel plants located near to raw material supplies no longer had a cost advantage,
particularly when land transport was required. For example, in the United Kingdom,
TABLE 9.2 The five ‘major’ bulk commodities shipped
by sea (mt)
Source: Fearnleys World Bulk Trades
THE FIVE MAJOR DRY BULKS

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
316
Northamptonshire ores were trebled in cost by transport to Middlesbrough, whereas
the cost of Lorraine ores in the Ruhr was hardly more than doubled for a much longer
journey owing to the availability of water transport.26 As the demand for steel expanded
in the twentieth century, the industry started to gravitate towards coastal steel plants,
which could import raw materials at minimum cost by using a carefully planned
integrated bulk shipping operation. This had the advantage that, with the resources
of the world accessible by sea, it was possible to find higher-quality raw materials
than were available locally, particularly in the traditional steelmaking areas of Western
Europe where the better-quality ores were already depleted.
The prototype for the modern integrated dry bulk transport operation was probably
the steel plant built by Bethlehem Steel at Sparrow’s Point, Baltimore, in the early
1920s. This plant was designed specifically to import iron ore by sea from Cruz
Grande in Chile, taking advantage of the newly-opened Panama Canal. To service
the trade, a contract was placed with the Brostrom group, which ordered two ore
carriers of 22,000 dwt. At the time these were two of the world’s largest ocean-
going cargo ships. Details of the shipping operation are recorded as follows:
The contract, signed in 1922, called for two ships to carry ore from Chile
through the Panama Canal to Bethlehem Steel Company’s plant at Sparrow’s
Point, Baltimore. The ships had no conventional cargo handling gear, and hinged
corrugated steel hatch covers. These were the full width of the holds, weighed 8
tons apiece and were clamped down to thick rubber gaskets. The Sveland was
delivered on 9th April 1925 and Americaland on 29th June and they promptly
entered their designed service between Cruz Grande and Baltimore. It was an
exacting schedule and the average time spent at sea each year was 320–330
days. At Cruz Grande the 22,000 tons cargo was normally loaded in two hours,
though the record was 48 minutes. Discharging at the other end required about
24 hours. Routine engine maintenance was carried out at sea, one of the two
engines being shut down for eight hours per trip. Painting was also carried out
while underway.27
This pattern of using large, specially designed ships on a shuttle service between
the mine and the steel plant became standard practice for coastal steel plants.
Although the size of ship used increased during the next 50 years, reaching 120,000
dwt in the 1960s and 300,000 dwt in the 1980s, the basic operational principles
remain the same.
The East Coast development of the US steel industry proved something of a
false start, and the major portion of US steelmaking continued to be concentrated
around the Great Lakes, using locally produced ores supplemented by imports
from Canada via the St Lawrence Seaway when the Labrador iron ore fields were
developed. As a result, the United States did not figure prominently in the post-war
overseas iron ore trade, and the principal importers of iron ore were Western
Europe and Japan, as can be seen in Figure 9.8.
During the post-war period of industrial expansion, steel demand grew rapidly.
In Europe and Japan this growth was met by building modern integrated coastal
steel plants using imported raw materials. In Japan there was little choice since

317
there were no domestic reserves of iron ore, but even in Europe where extensive
iron ore reserves are available these were of lower quality than the imported variety.
For new developments, the shorter land transit leg offered little cost advantage
over seaborne transport using large bulk carriers.
It was the rapid expansion of iron ore imports by the steel industry that
underpinned the bulk carrier boom of the 1960s. The Japanese and European steel
companies were prepared to offer long time charters to meet the regular raw
material requirements of the new coastal steel plants. These charters provided
many growing bulk shipping companies with the stable foundation on which to
base their fleet development strategy. In the early 1970s, however, the period of
growth came to an end. After a decade of steadily expanding ship demand, the
steel companies found themselves facing excess capacity and 1974 proved to be a
turning point for iron ore imports, as can be seen in Figure 9.8. The explanation of
this change is that in these two areas steel demand had reached saturation point in
the early 1970s: between 1975 and 1995, West European steel fell from 170 mt to
161 mt; during the same period Japanese production was static at 101 mt.28
There are many reasons for this radical change of trend, but the most important
was that the industries that are intensive users of steel (principally construction,
vehicles and shipbuilding) had all reached a plateau in their output.29 As a result,
the growth had been removed from the largest iron ore importers. In their place
the newly industrializing countries such as South Korea started to make an impact
in the 1990s, a trend that is visible in Figure 9.8.
Although we have concentrated on the demand for seaborne imports of iron
ore, the trade also depends crucially upon the development of a global network of
FIGURE 9.8 Iron ore imports 1962–95
Source: Clarkson Research Studies
THE FIVE MAJOR DRY BULKS

FIGURE 9.9 Major iron ore exporters and ports 1995
Source: Clarkson Research Studies
Note: Notes against each port indicate the maximum drought in Ports of the World

319
iron ore supplies, and Figure 9.9 shows the pattern that developed. Generally at
the initiative of the steel companies, iron ore resources were identified across the
globe and the necessary capital raised to develop the mines and install the requisite
transport infrastructure.
By far the largest iron ore exporters are Brazil and Australia. The first Brazilian
iron ore reserves to be developed were located in the famous Iron Quadrangle of
Minas Guerais and exported through the ports of Sepetiba and Tubarao. In 1986,
the first cargoes were exported from Carajas, a major iron ore development in the
Para region of Northern Brazil with port facilities at Itaqui geared to 300,000 dwt
bulk carriers. In 1995, Brazil exported 131 mt of iron ore, accounting for almost
one-third of the iron ore trade. The other major iron exporter is Australia, from
mines located in Northwest Australia. In 1995, Australia exported 133 mt of iron
ore, mainly through the three ports of Port Hedland, Dampier and Port Walcott.
The remaining third of the iron ore trade is supplied from a variety of smaller
exporters, of whom the most important are Sweden, South Africa, Liberia, India
and Venezuela.
The transport system for iron ore
Iron ore transport by sea is one of the great successes of industrial bulk shipping.
The iron ore generally has a stowage factor of 0.3 cubic metres per ton and is
almost always transported in bulk and in fall shiploads. Over the past decade there
has been great competition between suppliers in the Atlantic and Pacific, leading
to increasing distance between source and markets and the employment of the
largest ships possible. Generally iron ore ports serve as transfer terminals linking
two modes of transport, with storage areas at the port provide a surge capability
between the more or less continuous overland movement and the intermittent
ocean shipment.
At the mine large earth-moving equipment removes the ore from open pits and
transfers it to special trains or trucks that transfer it to port, where large cranes or
automatic dumping mechanisms place it in storage areas from which it is transferred
by means of gravity or by cranes to the ship. The ship then steams to a port or
coastal steel mill where the process is reversed. The entire system is geared to
anticipate mill needs with a continuous flow of the ore from mine to mill.
Although the economies of scale which can be achieved through the use of
large bulk vessels were well known in the 1950s, the transition from small vessels
to the larger sizes was not immediate. In 1965 80 per cent of all iron ore was
carried in vessels below 40,000 dwt, and over half the trade is still carried in ships
less than 80,000 dwt. The process of introducing large ships was thus a gradual
one, with the size of vessels built for use in the iron ore trade increasing steadily
from around 30,000 dwt in the early 1960s to 60,000 dwt in 1965; 100,000 dwt in
1969; and 150,000 dwt plus in the early 1970s and 300,000 dwt in the 1990s. For
example the Bergeland delivered in 1991 was a 300,000 dwt vessel designed
exclusively for the carriage of iron ore. In fact the size of ship has grown with the
volume of trade and the improvements in port facilities, though throughout many
small vessels built in previous periods continue to be used.
THE FIVE MAJOR DRY BULKS

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
320
The economics of the seaborne trade in metallurgical coal follows a similar
pattern to that of iron ore and it was the same commercial advantages that encouraged
European and Japanese steelmakers to import coal by sea. In the steel production
process, coal is first converted into coke in a coke oven, and the coke is then mixed
with iron ore and limestone to form a charge that is fed into the top of the blast
furnace. As the charge works its way down the blast furnace, the combustion of
the coke provides energy for reducing the iron ore, and at the bottom of the blast
furnace pig iron is drawn off, leaving a residue of slag.
This process makes special demands upon the coal. To do its job satisfactorily
the coke ‘must be porous to allow air circulation, strong enough to carry the
weight of the charge in the furnace without being crushed, and low in ash and
sulfur.’30 Many varieties of coal do not meet these requirements, and some grades
FIGURE 9.10 Coal imports 1962–95
Source: Clarkson Research Studies
The seaborne coal trade
Coal is the next largest of the dry bulk trades, with imports of 403 mt in 1995,
principally into Western Europe and Japan, as can be seen in Figure 9.10. The
seaborne coal trade is a good deal more complex than the iron ore trade because
coal imports have two different markets. The first is as a raw material for steelmaking
and the second as a fuel for the power-generating industry. This trade was important
in the early twentieth century and reappeared in the late 1970s.

321
are naturally more satisfactory than others. In Japan the reserves of suitable coal
were extremely limited, and in Europe, although coal with coking qualities is
available, supplies were being depleted. The move to coastal steel plants gave
steelmakers the opportunity to import the cheapest most suitable metallurgical
grade coals from foreign mines and blend them to give the precise requirements
for efficient steelmaking. As a result, coking coal imports grew rapidly during the
1960s, but stagnated in the 1970s in the same way as the iron ore trade and for the
same reason. This trend is only partly visible in Figure 9.10 because it is overlaid
by the trade in thermal coal, which grew rapidly in the late 1970s.
As a fuel, coal is extensively used in power stations, and is in competition with
oil. During the 1950s, the falling price of oil undermined the commercial case for
importing thermal coal by sea and by the early 1960s the thermal coal trade had
disappeared. For the next decade almost the only coal moved by sea was for
steelmaking. With the increase in oil prices during the 1970s, however, the relative
economics of coal and oil changed, and by 1979 there was an economic case to be
made for using coal as an energy source. It took several years to mobilize the
necessary volume and handling infrastructure.31 but from 1979 onwards there was
a rapid increase in thermal coal imports, which is clearly visible in Figure 9.10.
Supplies of suitable coal for the seaborne export trade were met partly from
established producers, and partly by developing new mines specifically for the export
market. Amongst the established suppliers, by far the most important sources are
North America and Australia, followed by South Africa, Canada and Columbia
(Figure 9.11). There are high-grade coal deposits on the East Coast USA in the
Appalachian Mountains. Coal is exported through the adjacent ports of Baltimore
and Hampton Roads or from the US Gulf, making use of the inland waterway system.
In 1995, about 20 per cent of world ‘coal exports came from the United States.32
The main new mines opened to service the coal trade were in Canada, Australia
South Africa, Indonesia and Columbia. In Canada, new mines were developed in
British Columbia and the coal shipped 700 miles by rail for export through bulk
handling terminals at Vancouver, mainly to Asian markets. In Australia, there are
major coal reserves in Queensland and New South Wales. As a whole, Australia
accounted for about one-third of the coal export trade in 1995. South African coal
is shipped by rail to Richards Bay for export. The bulk carriers used are generally
smaller than in the iron ore trade. The reasons for this appear to be the smaller
volume of coking coal used, relative to iron ore, its greater volume to stockpile,
the higher value and the risk of spontaneous combustion in very large units.
An example of a coal transport system is provided by the Hunter Valley/Port Of
Newcastle complex in Australia. The Port of Newcastle services the export trade
of over thirty coal mines located in the Hunter Valley behind Newcastle. The coal
moves by rail through marshalling depots to two port stockpile areas. The port has
three coal loaders loading up to four ships at once, ranging from vessels of only
10,000 dwt to coal carriers of 150,000 dwt. The water draught is maintained at
15.2 metres by a dredging programme which is paid for by the coal and steel
companies, making it one of the deepest ports in Australia. The cargo handling
equipment used for coal is very similar to the iron ore system described in the
previous section.
THE FIVE MAJOR DRY BULKS

FIGURE 9.11 Major coal exporters and ports 1996
Source: Fearnleys, World Bulk Trades, 1995

323
The seaborne grain trade
Although grain is grouped with iron ore and coal as one of the five major bulks, in
both economic and shipping terms it is fundamentally a different business. Whereas
iron ore and coal form part of a carefully structured industrial operation, grain is
an agricultural commodity, seasonal in its trade and irregular in both volume and
route. Consequently it is extremely difficult to optimize, or even plan, grain
shipments and the trade depends heavily on general-purpose tonnage drawn from
the charter market.
In 1995, the grain trade was 184 mt. Grain is used as human food and as animal
feedstuff in the production of meat. Wheat accounted for about half of the grain
trade in the mid-1990s, mostly destined for human consumption; the other half
consisted of maize, barley and oilseeds, mainly for use as animal feedstuff. By
commodity, in 1995 the seaborne grain trade was wheat 97 mt, and course grains
91 mt.33 Thus the grain trade is more closely linked to meat production than to
direct human food.
The steady upward trend in seaborne grain imports shown in Figure 9.12 was to
a large extent driven by the trend towards greater meat consumption at higher
income levels. Although part of the grain trade is certainly destined to meet harvest
FIGURE 9.12 Grain imports 1965–95
Source: Fearnleys, World Bulk Trades 1995 and earlier editions
shortfalls and relieve famines, the real volume is intended for feeding animals in
industrial and industrializing societies where each unit of meat produced requires
anything from five to fifteen units of animal feed.34 The dietary pattern that underlies
this trend, and the subsequent impact on grain demand in the post-1945 era, is
described by Morgan as follows:
THE FIVE MAJOR DRY BULKS

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
324
Rising incomes put more money into people’s pockets for buying food. Millions
of families ‘stepped-up’ to diets that included more bread, meat and poultry.
Livestock and poultry rather than people became the main market for American
grain, and the soya beans and corn ranked with jet aircraft and computers as the
country’s major exports. As more countries aspired to this grain based diet, the
need for grain increased.35
The pattern of trade is shown in Figure 9.12. During the 1960s the grain trade was
dominated by Europe and Japan, which accounted for more than two-thirds of
total grain imports. In tonnage terms this sector of the trade remained fairly static
during the 1970s and early 1980s. Almost all of the growth in the volume of
seaborne imports came from the entry of Eastern Europe, including the USSR,
and the developing countries into the market. By 1995 the trade share of Europe
had fallen to only 4 per cent and Japan had fallen to 13 per cent. Asia (29 per cent),
particularly China, South America (17 per cent), and Africa (16 per cent) had all
become much more important.
The grain trade model
In view of the importance of the food/feed relationship in the grain trade, it is
worth taking a closer look at the economics of the food trade. This is a typical
supply/demand model of the type we discussed in Chapter 7. Food demand depends
on income, population, prices, daily calorie intake and consumer tastes, while
supply depends on land, yields, policies, prices and feed conversion efficiency.
The demand relationship between income and food consumption is particularly
important. The nineteenth-century German statistician Ernst Engel discovered that
as incomes rise the proportion spent on food declines.36 He also found that within the
food budget, the type of food purchased changes with income. At low income levels
demand is for necessities such as rice, cereals and vegetables, but as income rises
there is a tendency to substitute animal products such as meat and dairy for basic
commodities such as cereals, root crops and rice. If we define the ‘income elasticity’
as the percentage increase in demand for a one per cent increase in income, we find
that some products have a higher income elasticity than others37. Livestock related
food (i.e. meat and dairy products) tend to have a higher income elasticity than
grains, vegetables and rice. Since a larger part of the cereals trade is for animal feed
rather than direct consumption this is one of the main sources of growth.
Turning to the supply side of the food trade model, we have another set of
complex relationships. Between 1980 and 1990 world output of food increased by
about 26 per cent. Crop production depends upon crop yield and the area and
agricultural land. Prices, political policies and stock changes are also important
variables. Until the early years of the twentieth century most of the world’s increase
in crop production came from either an increase in land (e.g. the opening up of the
North American grainlands) or from an increase in the amount of labour used.
During the twentieth century these trends have been reversed. Agricultural yields
have increased steadily, while the amount of arable land has remained fairly constant.

325
Higher yields were obtained from greater fertilizer application, improved seed
varieties, mechanization, pesticides and better farming techniques. There are
enormous differences in productivity around the world. For example average level
of French cereal output per worker is ten times as great as Japan and forty times as
great as India.
Although the analysis of the grain trade often concentrates on short term supply
shortages in response to harvests, the food trade model emphasizes the importance
of changing demand in response to income and prices. The rapid growth of imports
by the newly industrializing countries in the 1980s and 1990s was the response to
rising incomes, the high income elasticity of animal products in these countries
and their need to import animal feeds. As in the oil trade, the substitution effect of
prices should not be overlooked.
The transport of grain
As an example of the grain transport system we can take the processing of Canadian
wheat into consumer products. The wheat is harvested by large combines in the
Canadian Prairies and moved by truck from the field to a storage elevator, into which
it is transferred by conveyor or by an air pressure (pneumatic) system. During high
harvests or when demand is low these storage facilities may become inadequate and
in the past farmers have been reduced to storing grain in sacks in any covered storage
which is available. From the storage elevator the wheat is gravity fed to a railroad car
and shipped to port where it is off-loaded from the rail car by opening a hopper in the
bottom of the car to allow the grain to fall on to a conveyor under the rail track. From
here the conveyor transfers the wheat into an elevator where it awaits transfer to a
merchant ship. Naturally the elevator must hold enough grain to fill the ship.
At the other end of the voyage the process is reversed and the grain is off-
loaded from the ship into a storage elevator (i.e. silo) and shipped to a flour mill
or feed compounder where it is again stored in silos. From the silos it moves to the
grinding facility via a conveyor or an air slide. The finished flour coming from the
end of the line is either packaged for the consumer market or shipped in bulk by
rail and truck to bakeries, other large industrial users, or farmers.
At the bakery the flour is again placed in a silo or hopper, conveyed to a mixing
unit for dough preparation, baked into bread or other products, sent to an automatic
wrapping machine, and wheeled to trucks for delivery. In many cases the first time
the product is handled as a single unit is when the consumer takes it from the shelf.
Such an integrated transport system is made possible by meticulous attention to
required materials handling systems within each process and to the transfers of
material between processes.
Despite this organization, the sea transport of grain is not managed in the same
carefully planned way as the industrial commodities. Because the trade is seasonal
and fluctuates with the harvest in the exporting and importing regions, shippers
rely heavily on the spot market, using the ships that are available. These fluctuations
are not predictable, so planning transport is very difficult and complex. To load
cargoes upwards of 70,000 tons involves careful scheduling of input barges or box
cars from many different sources, often at the height of the season. Discharging
THE FIVE MAJOR DRY BULKS

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
326
can be equally hazardous since there are all the problems of ensuring the prompt
arrival of a multitude of barges and coasters, and penalties for faulty consignment
and demurrage charges grow more rapidly with large cargoes.38 For this reason it
is more difficult to introduce large ships into the grain trade than into the iron ore
and coal trades and there is often congestion.
The major grain-exporting ports are shown in Figure 9.13 in relation to the
grain-producing areas from which they draw their supplies. In 1995, over 60 per
cent of all grain exports were shipped out of Canada and the United States, so this
is clearly the most important loading area. Essentially the US Gulf ports and the
East Coast ports serve the southern end of the US grain belt, while the Great Lakes
and the St Lawrence serve the northeast. Production from Saskatchewan and Alberta
is shipped mainly through West Coast ports, especially Vancouver. Size limitations
vary considerably, though ports on the lower St Lawrence and New Orleans can
load vessels over 100,000 dwt.
The seaborne bauxite and phosphate rock trades
The two remaining major bulk trades, bauxite/alumina and phosphate rock, are a
good deal smaller, together accounting for about 7 per cent of the total trade in the
five major bulks in 1995. Bauxite ore is the raw material of aluminium making,
while alumina is its semi-refined product. It takes about 5.4 tons of bauxite to produce
2 tons of alumina, from which 1 ton of aluminium can be smelted. Shipments of
bauxite ore and the intermediate product, alumina, totalled 49 mt in 1995.
The trade in bauxite and alumina follows the familiar industrial pattern we
have already discussed under the heading of oil, iron ore and coal, but with some
special features. In the early 1950s the trade was dominated by North American
imports from the Caribbean, but in the 1960s both Europe and Japan entered the
trade on a major scale. Although aluminium is used in much smaller quantities
than steel, it has been finding new markets; consequently demand grew very rapidly
during the first six decades of the century. To meet this demand, during the 1960s
aluminium companies in Western Europe and Japan built domestic aluminium
smelters, importing bauxite from the Caribbean, the traditional producer, and also
from newly developed reserves in West Africa and Australia. As a result, there was
a rapid growth in the seaborne bauxite trade. This pattern changed fairly dramatically
in the 1970s as the bauxite producers moved downstream into alumina refining
and the aluminium smelters in Europe and Japan proved uneconomic owing to the
high cost of electricity for aluminium smelting, particularly after the 1973 oil
crisis. As a result, although the demand for aluminium continued to grow, the sea
trade in bauxite and alumina remained at the same level of around 42–44 mt for
the decade 1974–1984. After this structural adjustment growth resumed with the
trade reaching 49 mt in 1995.
Aluminium production technology follows the classic pattern of industrial
integration, and in principal it is generally possible to optimize the shipping
operation by using vessels of Panamax size or above. The alumina trade, on the
other hand, does not generally favour the use of vessels of Panamax size and over,

FIGURE 9.13 Major grain exporters and ports 1995
Source: Fearnleys, World Bulk Trades, 1995

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
328
since alumina has a high value, needs to be stored under cover and the quantities of
raw material required by a smelter are too small to encourage large bulk deliveries.
An aluminium smelter producing 100,000 tons of metal per annum would require
200,000 tons of alumina, hardly a sufficient volume to justify the use of Panamax
bulk carriers.
The phosphate rock trade is quite different. All the phosphate used today comes
from phosphate rock and it is used principally as a fertilizer. The main importers
are Western Europe and Japan, where the phosphate is used for the production of
compound fertilizers. Since the average size of plant is comparatively small and
often located in rural areas, the convenient size of cargo parcel is small with little
incentive to use very large bulk carriers except on major routes such as the North
Atlantic. The main exporters of phosphate rock are Morocco, the US and the
USSR. Traditionally, phosphate is shipped in its raw form, but there has been an
increasing trend towards processing into phosphoric acid prior to shipment.
9.7 The minor bulk trades
The third, and in many ways the most complex, sector of the bulk shipping market
is the minor bulk trades. As can be seen in Table 9.1, this group comprises a mass
of raw materials and semi-manufactures that are shipped totally or partly in bulk,
comprising steel products, forest products, sugar, non-ferrous metal ores, fertilizers,
and various industrial materials such as scrap, pig iron and rice. This is not a
complete list, but it covers the main items.
As a group, the trade in these commodities was about 623 mt in 1995, though
not all of this was shipped in bulk carriers. In fact one of the major features of this
trade sector is that the size and industrial characteristics of many of the minor bulk
commodities mean that they are shipped partly by liner and partly by bulk, depending
on the circumstances. This point has already been illustrated with the case of
nickel matte (see p. 296), but it is of such fundamental importance in understanding
the minor bulk trades that it deserves additional attention.
A good example of a trade that straddles the bulk and liner sector is provided by
steel products. In tonnage terms, steel is one of the largest seaborne commodity
trades, with total imports of approximately 195 mt in 1995, though some of this
was by land. Although a trade of this size might be expected to travel in large bulk
carriers, the shipment of steel products involves a wide range of shipping activities.39
Take the exports of the British Steel Corporation as an example:
for large contracts shipped on deep sea routes—for example, structural steel
sections or tin plate exported to the Far East or the US West Coast—bulk
carriers of 25,000–30,000 dwt would be chartered; in minor trades over long
distances where the market volume fluctuates from year to year, liner services
would generally be used depending on availability, or small conventional vessels
chartered if sufficient cargo is available; in the short sea trades—for example,
involving exports to continental Europe—small coasters of 500–3,000 dwt would
be chartered; very small consignments on the short sea trades would be shipped
on trailers using conventional ro-ro services; on deep sea routes, medium-size

329
trades of, say, 50,000 tons per year may be sent by container or ro-ro service
using half-size containers or other specially constructed stowage devices.
This diversity of cargo parcel sizes means that the shipper will use whatever type
of shipping operation is most economic for that particular cargo; in some cases
this may involve the use of a bulk carrier, but in others the use of the liner service
may be more appropriate.
Another high-volume minor bulk trade is forest products, of which approximately
167 mt a year were shipped in 1995. Forest products share many of the bulk
handling problems raised by steel products. Thomas’s Stowage lists fifty-six
different types of timber, all with different weights per unit volume, and twenty-
six forms in which they can be shipped, ranging from logs to batons and bundles.
Luan, the major export of Malaysia, has a density of about 1.25 cubic metres per
ton, while Norwegian pine has a density of 1.8 cubic metres per ton. In practice,
forest products stow at about 50 per cent more than the above rates due to air
space, which is high for logs and bundles and lower for loose sawn timber. Sawn
timber packed to length, which is the practice of Canadian exporters, has a better
stowage rate than timber that has been ‘truck packed’, i.e. bundled together in
different lengths. As a very rough guide, in purpose-built ships logs stow at 2.7
cubic metres per ton or more, bundled and sawn timber at 2.2 cubic metres per
ton, and the best rate is rarely better than 1.7 cubic metres per ton.
In the 1950s the forest products trade consisted mainly of European imports,
and formed a valuable backhaul cargo for liners that had discharged general cargo
in Third World countries, for example West Africa. As the trade grew in the early
1960s it started to go bulk. Initially forest products shippers chartered in convention
tonnage, but this proved generally unsatisfactory. Since the mid-1960s, there has
been a trend towards building specialist ships, either small log carriers for use in
Southeast Asia or specialized open hold bulk carriers with extensive cargo handling
gear for use in long haul trades such as West Coast North America to Western
Europe.
As with other primary materials, the basis of the forest products trade is supply
and demand. Much the largest component of the trade is within South-east Asia,
dominated by the Japanese who import logs from Malaysia, Indonesia and the
Philippines. Japanese forests were depleted by over-cutting in the Second World
War and the import trade developed through the established lumber mills. A trade
also developed into Japan from West Coast North America, including a sizable
trade in woodchips, which were also imported from Australia and Siberia. A number
of special woodchips carriers were built to service this trade, which requires a very
high cubic capacity compared with normal bulk carriers. In total, Japanese imports
account for about half of the forest products imports.
Europe is the other major importer of forest products, though on a much smaller
scale. In Europe, much of the temperate forest is already intensively used, but
North Europe, particularly Scandinavia, is self-sufficient with an exportable surplus.
Southern Europe has become a major importer, drawing imports from Northern
Europe, the USSR and North America, though some hardwoods come from West
Africa and Asia. The West Coast North America to Europe trade is mainly lumber
THE MINOR BULK TRADES

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
330
and pulp loaded at a number of ports in the Vancouver area and is almost entirely
bulk. However, pulp, paper and logs continue to travel by liner in some cases.
Cement is another sizeable minor bulk trade and reached a record 53 mt in
1995. The trade is composed mainly of shipments to construction projects in Africa,
Asia and the Middle East. By its nature the trade is volatile and ships tend to be
chartered for either the carriage of bulk or bagged cement. Many small bulk carriers
and ’tweendeckers are used and port restrictions often require the use of vessels
over 20,000 dwt.
The minor bulk trades include various manufactured fertilizers, of which
ammonium sulphate and urea are the two most important. They are generally
powdered or granular in form, and can travel loose or bagged in a bulk carrier or
in liners. There are few handling problems, though they usually require undercover
storage, and ammonium sulphate in particular is likely to absorb water from the
atmosphere if not protected. Since their final market is in agriculture, individual
consignments tend to be relatively small, so this is not a commodity that is likely
to be shipped in 40,000-ton lots. Many shipments are to small ports in rural areas
and may be only a few thousand tons. Another factor limiting the size of vessel in
the fertilizer trade is that 70 per cent of the trade is into developing countries and
half is to very small importers, even the larger ones taking only a few hundred
thousand tons each. This results in the trade travelling predominantly in the 10,000–
18,000 dwt size group of vessels, while part still travels by container.
About 26 mt of non-ferrous metal ores are shipped by sea, including manganese
ore, and nickel, zinc and copper concentrates. Manganese has a high density, with
trade of about 8 mt a year shipped mainly to Europe, Japan and the US from South
Africa, the CIS, Gabon and Brazil. It has a low average value and differs little
from iron ore, except that it is used in much smaller quantities. Consequently
manufacturers keep small stores and large shipments are inconvenient. The trades
in nickel, zinc, copper and chrome concentrates generally travel in small parcels
owing to their high value and the small stocks carried by refineries. Transport is
by small bulk carrier, container or bags.
Sugar consists of three trades, raw sugar (which is shipped loose in bulk),
refined sugar (which is generally shipped in bags) and molasses (which is a by-
product of sugar refining and is shipped in tankers). The main loading areas for
both raw sugar and molasses are various developing countries, South Africa and
Australia. The largest producers are Cuba, Brazil, the Philippines, the Dominican
Republic and Australia, but one-third of the trade is made up of very small exporters
in the tropical areas. Many countries (such as Costa Rica, Pakistan, Indonesia)
produce sugar as a cash crop and have exports of only a few hundred thousand tons
at the most. Loading facilities in these countries are frequently very poor and,
since the trade is seasonal and highly fragmented, there is little incentive to improve
them. As a result the trade is still largely restricted to small ships.
The salt trade is mainly into Japan. The Mexican trade to Japan was the first to
develop in the early 1960s from the Mexican solar salt plant Exportadora de Sal.
The trade is something of an oddity among the minor bulks, since it is shipped in
very large bulk carriers. Shortly after the Japanese started to import salt from
Mexico in 1962, D.K.Ludwig, the American shipowner, realized that he could

331
radically reduce the CIF price of salt in Japan by adopting a plan that involved
building a 170,000 dwt bulk/oil vessel, the Cedros, which was launched in 1965,
renting a small Japanese island as a bulk terminal, and obtaining a backhaul of
crude oil from Indonesia to Los Angeles. The trade grew steadily throughout the
1960s. Salt is also shipped from Australia to Japan.
Sulphur is a small bulk trade. The major importers are Western Europe, various
developing countries (particularly India and Brazil) and Australia, New Zealand
and South Africa. Sulphur is transported either in dry form (crushed, flaked,
slated or pelleted), or as a molten liquid. Although dry sulphur can be shipped in
conventional bulk carriers or two-deckers, it is not an easy cargo. It ignites easily,
there is a danger of explosion from sulphur dust, it is extremely corrosive and in
conditions of excess moisture it may produce hydrogen sulphide gas which is
poisonous. For this reason a number of special dry sulphur carriers have been built
incorporating various features such as a double skin (so that the interior skin can
be easily cleaned and replaced when corroded), sealed hatches, special gas
monitoring equipment, intensive hold-washing equipment and mechanical
ventilation. Flaking and pelleting of sulphur have brought some improvements
though the commodity remains a difficult one to transport.
To ship sulphur in liquid form special tankers are required, with heating coils,
stainless steel tanks, special valve gear, and inert gas systems to prevent explosions.
Although these vessels can be used in other chemical trades, the reverse is not
true—conventional chemical tankers are not generally suitable for sulphur
transportation. In addition, special loading and discharging facilities are required,
so that trade is generally conducted under long-term contract. This is, therefore, a
trade for which ships must be especially built or converted.
In conclusion, the minor bulk trades form an important source of bulk carrier
employment, particularly for smaller sizes of vessels. Because of the physical
characteristics of some cargoes and the low volume, they offer many more
opportunities for innovative shipping operations than the major bulk cargoes, and
are subject to many constraints that limit them to small ships.
9.8 Refrigerated cargo
Finally we come to refrigerated cargo or ‘reefer’ trades. This forms an important
market, but once again we find competition between the bulk and liner services
for carriage of this cargo. Part of the trade is carried in reefer vessels, i.e. ships
totally dedicated to the carriage of reefer cargo with insulated holds, while another
part of the trade is shipped in reefer containers on liner services whose vessels are
equipped to carry reefer containers. The major reefer trades are briefly summarized
in Figure 9.14.
The fresh meat trade is principally from Australia, New Zealand and Argentina
into the developed areas of Western Europe, the US and Japan. The trade accounts
for only a very small proportion of meat consumption and growth has been more
rapid into Japan and West Coast North America than elsewhere, benefiting
particularly from the growth of the ‘fast food’ business. Fresh milk is hardly traded
internationally (though there is a trade in powdered milk of over 2 mt per annum)
REFRIGERATED CARGO

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
332
and the main dairy trades are in butter and cheese. The traditional trade was from
New Zealand or Australia into the UK, though this has changed in recent years as
a result of the UK joining the EEC.
Finally there is the fruit and vegetable trade, which is the dominant reefer
cargo. In 1993 the trade included 8.5 mt of citrus fruit, 11.6 mt of bananas, 7.4 mt
of deciduous fruits and 10.5 mt of other assorted fresh fruit and vegetables. There
is a major trade in oranges from the Mediterranean, especially Israel, and South
Africa to Western Europe. The major exporters of bananas are the West Indies,
South America and, to a lesser extent, Africa. Western Europe and the US account
for about two-thirds of the imports. The ‘other vegetable’ trade includes a sizable
trade in manioc from South-east Asia to Western Europe where it is used as an
animal feed—this is not refrigerated cargo.
Food commodities transported by sea are perishable and need to be transported
at carefully regulated temperatures. Broadly speaking the refrigerated cargoes can
be divided into three groups:
1
Frozen cargo. Certain products such as meat and fish need to be fully frozen,
and transported at temperatures of up to -26°C.
2
Chilled cargo. Dairy products and other perishables are transported at low
temperatures, though above freezing point, in order to prevent decomposition.
3
Controlled temperatures. Fruit transported by sea is generally picked in a semi-
ripe state, and allowed to finish ripening at sea at a carefully controlled
temperature. For example bananas require precisely 13°C.
FIGURE 9.14 Trade in perishable commodities 1980–93
Source: Clarkson Research Studies

333
In all cases it is essential that temperatures are maintained consistently throughout
the ship in order to prevent deterioration of the cargoes. Even quite small temperature
deviations can be disastrous, especially for tropical fruit.
Because of the perishable nature of the product, a reliable transport system is
essential. The key stages in the process involve harvesting, transportation to the
port, where the cargo is placed in refrigerated storage facilities, transfer to the
ship, the sea voyage, discharge into refrigerated storage facilities and finally
distribution. In the last decade unitization has been used very extensively to improve
efficiency. The degree of automation in this system varies considerably. For example,
in some trades bananas are still carried on to the ship by stevedores, while in others
banana conveyors are used. Palletization has also been extensively introduced into
the reefer trades in order to make the transportation of refrigerated cargo more
efficient.
A substantial amount of refrigerated cargo is now transported in reefer containers.
These are containers which are fully insulated. Some have their own refrigeration
plants which can be plugged into an electric socket on the ship, while other rely on
receiving cold air from a central shipboard system in reefer container ships. The
advantage of reefer containers is that temperature can be more closely and accurately
regulated than is possible in the hold of refrigerated ships. In addition they facilitate
transfer of refrigerated cargo through ports which have no refrigerated storage
capacity.
9.9 The vehicle trade
The growth of international consumer markets in the 1970s and 1980s encouraged
a rapidly growing inter-regional trade in vehicles. The trade is principally from
Japan and South Korea to the United States and Europe, with a much smaller trade
from Europe to North America. In 1993 the trade on the three main routes was
about 3 million vehicles, 1.2 million from Japan to Europe, 1.6 million from Japan
to North America and 0.3 million from Europe to North America. These deep sea
trades have been static or declining for a decade because Japanese and European
manufacturers are increasingly producing their car exports locally.
This is a classic industrial shipping operation. As a cargo, cars are high volume,
low density, high value. Vehicles move in large numbers out of Western Europe
and Japan; shipped in purpose-built vehicle carriers. When operating at full capacity,
a large-scale auto assembly plan can produce about one car every 40 seconds. This
means that a full 24-hour production schedule results in a maximum daily production
of 2,160 cars. This level of production can be maintained for long periods despite
differentiation in colour, style, accessories and trim. Materials handling to ensure
that the right cars arrive at the right destination must be highly organized.
Finished cars cannot be economically stored at the plant and are moved to
distribution points as quickly as possible. This extends to the carriage of export
cars by sea and the shipping operation must ‘fit’ the overall system with storage
facilities at the port, fast cargo handling, timely arrival of ships and security for the
valuable product in transit. Thus the trade is carried in a fleet of 300 vehicle carriers
operated to carefully scheduled timetables by professional management teams.
THE VEHICLE TRADE

BULK CARGO AND THE ECONOMICS OF BULK SHIPPING
334
The largest vessels carry up to 6,000 vehicles, often with hoistable decks which
can be adjusted to transport trucks and earth-moving equipment, especially on the
backhaul when the vessels are generally empty.
9.10 Summary
This chapter was about bulk shipping. We started by discussing two different
definitions of bulk cargo. The first defines ‘bulk cargo’ as anything whose physical
characteristics allow it to be handled in bulk. The second is just concerned with
transport economics. If the trade flow is large enough almost anything can be
shipped in bulk to reduce costs. The trades in motor vehicles and sheep, both shipped
in specially built vessels, illustrate the point.
There are five classes of bulk cargo, liquid bulk, dry bulk, unit loads, wheeled
cargo and perishable cargoes. Each needs a different bulk handling system to deal
with its distinctive characteristics. We identified four principles which determine
the suitability of a cargo for bulk transport: the volume of cargo, its physical handling
and stowage characteristics, the value of the cargo and the regularity of the material
flow. The balance of these four criteria determine the stage at which it is worth
making the step from liner transport to a bulk shipping operation.
There are dozens of commodities shipped in bulk by sea. Because each has its
own physical and economic characteristics it is very difficult to generalize about
bulk trade. As far as commodities are concerned, crude oil and the five major bulks
are shipped almost exclusively in bulk vessels. In the minor bulk trades, however,
many of the commodity groups straddle liner and bulk shipment, owing to a
combination of factors including low volume, irregular shipment, handling and
stowage difficulties and, most importantly, the fact that manufacturing plants do
not wish to receive large consignments of cargo. The shipper must select
the system which gives the best commercial result for his particular industrial
operation.
Many of the minor bulk trades offer opportunities for innovation and ingenuity
on the part of the shipowner, and there are more novel shipping systems to be
found in these trades than in the five major bulks. For this reason, minor bulk
trades such as forest products, chemicals, vehicles and refrigerated cargo are
dominated by a small number of shipowners who have the combined managerial
skill, specialist expertise and investment in ships and terminals to provide the
service required by the shipper at minimum cost.
Turning to the question of growth trends in the dry bulk trades, we found that a
pattern emerged from the analysis of commodity trade growth since the Second
World War. Generally the demand for imports was dominated by Western Europe
and Japan, which in the period after 1945 turned to the world market for imports of
bulk raw materials such as crude oil, iron ore, coking coal, bauxite, phosphate
rock, forest products and non-ferrous metal ores. There was a period of rapid
exponential growth during the 1960s when the industry in these areas grew rapidly,
leading to rapidly expanding demand for oil tankers and dry bulk carriers.
The 1970s brought a turning point as the impetus for growth died away and the
bulk trades stagnated. This change was partly due to external economic forces,

335
particularly the dollar devaluation of September 1971 and the oil crisis of October
1973, but looking below the surface, we find that Europe and Japan were entering
a more mature phase of the Trade Development Cycle. By the 1980s new countries
such as South Korea, China and the ‘tiger economies’ of Asia had become the
main source of growth in the bulk trades.
SUMMARY

