337
Chapter 10
Chapter 10
The general cargo and
the economics of liner
shipping
The growing intricacy and variety of commerce is adding to the advantages
which a large fleet of ships under one management derives from its power
of delivering goods promptly, and without breach of responsibility, in
many different ports; and as regards the vessels themselves time is on the
side of large ships.
(Alfred Marshall, Principles of Economics, 8th Edition,
The Macmillan Press Ltd, 1890)

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
338
10.1 Introduction
Liner services play a central part in the global trading network, carrying about 60
per cent of the value of goods shipped by sea.1 They provide fast, frequent and
reliable transport for almost any cargo to almost any foreign destination at a
predictable charge. Thus, a Californian wine grower selling 2,000 cases of wine to
a UK wholesaler knows that he can ship the wine by a liner service, that the
journey will take twelve to fifteen days and he is quoted a through rate for the
container. On this basis he can work out his profit and his cashflow and make the
necessary delivery arrangements with confidence. If the destination was not Europe,
but Iceland, Kenya or India, the procedure would be much the same—he could
ship his wine on a regular service at a fixed tariff that may increase with inflation
but will not go through the wild peaks and troughs encountered in the charter
market. It is an important business for the world economy as well as the shipping
industry.
This chapter examines how the liner business operates. We start with a brief
review of the evolution from cargo liners to containerized transport. This is followed
by a discussion of the economics of liner pricing and costs which are central to
managing the business. We then look at the demand for liner services and supply
in terms of ships and business organization. Finally, we examine the major liner
routes, ports and terminals. Some of the technical terms used in the liner business
are listed in the Glossary.
10.2 The origins of the liner service
Liners are a recent addition to the shipping business, dating from the 1870s when
improving steamship technology first made it possible to offer scheduled services.
Until that time a few shipowners such as the Black Ball Line had tried to run
regular services with sailing ships, but most ‘general cargo’ was carried by ‘tramps’
working from port-to-port. Developments in the commercial world also made a
contribution. Steamship agents became better organized, with branches at key
trading points in the Far East. The banking services for day-to-day business were
greatly improved and the extension of the telegraph to the Far East enabled trading
houses in China to sell by telegraphic transfer in London and India.2
Steamships created the supply, the new commercial system stimulated demand
and the shipping community was quick to seize the opportunity. The opening of
the Suez Canal in 1869 demonstrated the advantages of steamships, and when this
was followed by a freight market boom in 1872–3 there was a flood of orders for
steamships to set up liner services on the prosperous Far East route. Once established
the network of liner services grew rapidly into the comprehensive transport system
which exists today.
The ‘cargo liner’ era 1869–1966
Until the 1960s liner companies ran fleets of multi-deck vessels known as cargo
liners, versatile ships with their own cargo handling gear. Shipping had not

339
subdivided into the many specialist operations we have today and the liner services
had to carry a mixture of manufactures, semi-manufactures, minor bulks and
passengers. The trade routes were mainly between the European countries and
their colonies in Asia, Africa and South America and on many routes trade was
unbalanced with an outward trade of manufactures and a home trade of minor
bulks. Filling the ship was the main aim and ship designers were preoccupied with
building flexible vessels which could carry all sorts of cargo—even the first oil
tankers built at this time were designed to carry a general cargo backhaul. The
multi-deck ‘cargo liner’, with its capacity to carry both general cargo and bulks,
was the preferred choice.
There was another aspect of the cargo liner system which gave it great flexibility.
Because the cargo liners were similar in size and design and speed to the
‘tweendeckers used by tramp operators, the fleets were to a large extent
interchangeable. A tramp could become a liner, and a liner could at times become
a tramp.3 This allowed liner companies to charter-in tramps to supplement their
own fleets. For example, tramps returning from the UK to the River Plate to load
grain would often carry a general cargo backhaul. Liner companies became
charterers of tramp tonnage,4 while tramp owners relied on the liner business as a
cushion against the cycles in the bulk market and often built ships with ’tween
decks and good speeds, which would fit conveniently into liner company schedules.
Since the size of ships used in the bulk and liner markets was roughly the same,
this system of risk management worked well for both parties.
As trade grew in the twentieth century, the system was refined and developed.
To improve productivity and widen their cargo base liner companies built more
sophisticated ‘cargo liners’, adding features such as tanks for vegetable oils,
refrigerated holds, extensive cargo handling gear, ro-ro decks and much automated
equipment. They became increasingly complex and expensive. The Pointe Sans
Souci class built in the early 1970s by Compagnie Generale Maritime (CGM) for
their Europe-Caribbean service illustrates the extremes to which liner companies
would go in their search for a more cost-effective cargo liner. These ships of 8,000
dwt were designed to carry cargo that had previously been carried by a mixed fleet
of traditional liners and reefer ships. The forward holds were insulated to carry
refrigerated cargoes, with collapsible container cell guides and electrical points
for refrigerated containers. Doors for banana conveyors were let into the ‘tween
decks in each hold and side doors allowed the ’tween decks to be worked at the
same time as the lower hold. Hatch covers were strengthened to take containers,
and a 35-ton crane enabled the ship to be fully self-sufficient with container loads
in the smaller ports of the West Indies. Holds aft of the bridge were devoted to
palletized or vehicle cargo on two decks, with access by a wide stern ramp or a
side door if the port does not have facilities for stern-to-quay loading. Below were
tanks for carrying bulk rum.
Although the cargo liner was flexible, it was also labour and capital intensive.
In the 1950s labour became more expensive and the trading world changed in a
way which made flexibility less important than productivity. As the colonies gained
independence the liner companies lost many of the core trades in which the cargo
liners had been most effective. At the same time many of the minor bulk backhaul
THE ORIGINS OF THE LINER SERVICE

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
340
trades transferred to bulk carriers at rates the liners could not possibly match. As
the bulk carrier fleet grew in size the liner and bulk shipping industries grew apart.
However, the most important change was in the pattern of trade. In the rapidly
growing economy of the 1950s and 1960s, the real growth in trade was between
the prosperous industrial centres of Europe, North America and Japan. Shippers in
these trades needed fast, reliable, secure transport and the shortcomings of cargo
liners became increasingly obvious. The cost, complexity and poor delivery
performance of the cargo liner system became a major stumbling block. Shippers
did not want to wait while their cargo made a leisurely progression round eight or
ten ports, often arriving damaged.
For the liner companies, running cargo liners had become equally unrewarding.
Expensive ‘tailor made’ ships spent up to 50 per cent of their time in port, which tied
up capital, and limited the scope for economies of scale because doubling a cargo
liner’s capacity almost doubled its port time. There was not a great deal managers or
naval architects could do to alleviate the fundamental problems of packing 10–
15,000 tons of general cargo into a ship’s hold.5 By the 1960s the expense of the
ships, the cargo handling problems and the segregation of their cargo from the rest of
the transport system had made the cargo liners technologically obsolete.
The container era 1966–95
The solution was to unitize general cargo. Standardizing the cargo unit allowed
liner companies to invest in mechanized systems and equipment which would
automate the transport process and raise productivity. The whole procedure was
essentially an extension of the ‘production line’ technology which had been applied
so successfully to manufacturing industry and in many of the bulk trades. Three
steps were required to implement this strategy.
•  First, the product, general cargo, needed to be transformed into standard units
so that investment could be applied to the whole transport operation. Several
different systems were considered and containers were chosen by all the major
operators.
•  Second, components in the transport system needed to be developed into an
integrated transport system to take advantage of the standardized unit and
economies of scale. On the sea leg the investment was in purpose-built cellular
container ships. On land it required investment in large numbers of road and
rail vehicles capable of carrying containers efficiently.
•  The third step was to build high speed cargo handling facilities to transfer the
container between one part of the transport system and another. Container
terminals, inland distribution depots and container ‘stuffing’ facilities all played
a part in this process.
Containerization drew on the experience that already existed within the United
States where, by the mid-1960s, there was a box fleet of 54,000 units (see Table
10.1).6 For some years trucking companies and railways had adopted the concept
of a single unit, detachable from its transport vehicle, which could easily be
transferred from one transport mode to another (inter-modal). At sea, container

341
tankers were introduced in the New York to
Houston trade in 1956, and in 1958 the
California to Hawaii trade had been
containerized.
Establishing standard containers was crucial.
Because road regulations differed across the
US, various different sizes of container were
in use, particularly a 35 ft box. Eventually the
International Standards Organization (ISO)
developed standards which applied to
dimensions, corner casting strength, floor
strength, racking tests and the gross weight of
the container. Initially for general cargo the
standard boxes were 8 ft high and 8 ft wide,
with four optional lengths, 10 ft, 20 ft, 30 ft
and 40 ft. In 1976, the height of standard containers was increased to 8 ft 6 ins,
giving additional volume without altering the dimensions of the container. In recent
years 20 ft and 40 ft containers have become the ‘workhorses’ of the international
container business. Out of a total container stock of 9.6 million TEU (20 ft equivalent
units) in 1995, 39 per cent were 20 ft units and 53 per cent were 40 ft units. About
15 per cent of the container fleet consists of special containers, including reefer
containers (7.3 per cent), and special dry freight containers (5.1 per cent). The latter
are mainly open top containers (Table 10.2). Containers generally have a life of 12
to 14 years. In Europe and the US about half of the container-fleet is leased.
The first deep sea container service was inaugurated on the North Atlantic in
April 1966 by Sea-Land, a company set up by Malcolm MacLean, who was a
trucker rather than a shipowner. His experience of running trucks along the east
coast of the US had convinced him of the merit of a cargo-handling system that
could use all three transport modes—road, rail and sea.
TABLE 10.2 World container stock by principal type
Source: Containerisation International World Container Census,
January 1996
TABLE 10.1 World container
fleet 1960–95
Sources: US Steel Commercial Research
Division and CI Market Analysis  Note:
Fleet sizes are in units (not TEU)
THE ORIGINS OF THE LINER SERVICE

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
342
The major European liner shipping companies, had by this time, also made the
decision to set up their own container services. Because of the size of the investment
in ships, shore-based handling facilities and of course the containers themselves,
consortia were formed. For example, Overseas Containers Limited (OCL), a joint
venture between P&O, Ocean Transport and Trading, British and Commonwealth
and Furness Withy was set up in 1965 (in 1986 OCL was taken over by P&O and
renamed P&OCL). This approach remains a feature of the container trades.
Developing a fleet of container ships represented a technical challenge. OCL’s
first order was for six 1,600 TEU Encounter Bay Class ships. The ships had open
holds with cell guides which allowed the containers to be loaded without clamping.
Steel hatch covers fitted flush and provided a platform on which containers could
be stacked four high and clamped in place. Although the ships were not big by the
standards of tankers and bulk carriers, this was a major investment in a type of
vessel which had not been built previously. On land the investment in trailer friendly
chassis progressed rapidly. For the first service in April 1966 Sea-Land signed up
over 300 European truckers.7
The other link in the chain was the container terminal Previously liner ports had
consisted of miles of wharves backing on to warehouses where ships would sit for
weeks handling cargo. The container terminals were very different. Two or three
berths served by gantry cranes, backed on to open storage. To speed up the link with
road transport Sea-Land stored the containers on trailers in a trailer park. Other
companies preferred to stack the containers three or four high, retrieving them from
storage as required. Movement within the terminals was also automated, using fork-
lift trucks, straddle carriers or, in a few cases, an automated gantry system.
This system of cargo handling proved to be tremendously effective. Handling
speeds vary from port-to-port, averaging about 20 lifts per crane hour, with a
range from 15 lifts an hour to 30 lifts an hour. The result was a dramatic
improvement in productivity. Whereas general cargo berths typically handled
100,000–150,000 tons per year, the new container terminals were able to handle
1–2,000,000 mt of cargo per berth. Inter-modal compatibility was also greatly
improved because the container itself is standardized.
The consequences of containerization
Containerization of the liner trades took about 20 years, by which time all of the
major liner routes and most of the minor ones had been containerized. Unitization
was very successful in its main objective of reducing port time. The comparison of
the operating performance of a traditional Priam class cargo liner with the Liverpool
Bay container ship illustrates the change. The 22,000 dwt cargo liner spent 149
days a year in port, 40 per cent of its time. The 47,000 dwt containership spent
only 64 days a year in port, 17 per cent of its time.8
It also had a profound effect on liner companies and other parts of the shipping
business. First, and most importantly, unitization gave liner companies the
opportunity to offer shippers a ‘door-to-door’ service. Previously most liner
companies saw their responsibilities as beginning and ending at the ship’s rail. In
the intense competition which followed unitization, offering a complete service

343
from origin to destination became an essential part of the product. This changed
the competitive arena and the approach to pricing (see section 10.6). Second, the
business consolidated into fewer companies. Hundreds of liner companies
disappeared and liner shipping became the most concentrated sector of the shipping
business. Third, the bustling ports of the cargo liner era disappeared, replaced by
container terminals with few staff and fewer ships. Fourth, ships and shipowning
slipped to the sidelines because the core business of liner companies was now
through transport. Fifth, the tramp market for ships carrying containerizable cargoes
disappeared. Containerships could not switch between liner charters and bulk, so
liner companies had to carry the marginal capacity they needed in their own fleets.
Tramp operators turned to the bulk carrier or tanker markets. Sixth, minor bulk
cargoes which had occupied the deep-well tanks, lower cargo holds and ro-ro
decks of cargo liners moved into specialist vessels such as ‘conbulkers’, parcel
tankers, vehicle carriers and mini-bulkers.
10.3 Economic principles of liner operation
Economic characteristics of liner services
Now it is time to take a closer look at the economics of the liner business. We start
with a definition:
A liner service is a fleet of ships, with a common ownership or management,
which provide a fixed service, at regular intervals, between named ports, and
offer transport to any goods in the catchment area served by those ports and
ready for transit by their sailing dates. A fixed itinerary, inclusion in a regular
service, and the obligation to accept cargo from all comers and to sail, whether
filled or not, on the date fixed by a published schedule are what distinguish the
liner from the tramp.9
From an economic viewpoint, providing this service has two important differences
from bulk shipping. First, transporting many small parcels requires a larger and
more complex administrative overhead, and second, the obligation to sail to a
timetable makes capacity inflexible. Two apparently small points, but they make a
tremendous difference. Whereas tramp owners respond quickly to supply/demand
imbalances by moving their least efficient ships into layup, liner companies must
stick with their schedules. If it takes six ships to run a weekly service, they must
operate six ships. From the outset this has created problems for liner operators,
making capacity management a key feature of the business.
In addition to the usual trade cycles which affect all shipping business, there are
several reasons why capacity management can be a problem. Seasonality occurs
on many liner routes where cargo volume is higher at some times of the year than
others. Cargo imbalances occur when there is more trade in one direction than the
other, forcing ships to sail part loaded on the leg with the smaller trade flow.
Finally indivisibilities arise because the supply of capacity is not continuous, but a
ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF LINER OPERATION

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
344
series of ship-sized increments. This means that when trade is growing, new ships
must be ordered in multiples dictated by the service frequency, with sufficient
capacity to cater for future growth. These problems also occur in the bulk market,
but they are quickly resolved by market forces as shipowners negotiate rates and
move from trade to trade. Liner companies lack this flexibility. With so many
customers it is not practical to negotiate a rate for every cargo. This combination
of fixed prices and inflexible capacity, leaves liner companies with a pricing problem
which has dominated the industry since it started.
The liner pricing problem
The principles of liner pricing can be illustrated with the supply/demand charts
shown in Figures 10.1 and 10.2. Consider the case of competing liner companies,
each operating a single ship, say a 4,000 TEU containership which makes five
trips a year. Each ship costs $40,000 per day to run, including capital, operating
costs and bunkers, and it costs $400 to handle each container. When the ship is
full, no additional cargo can be shipped. The vertical axis of the graph shows the
price (freight rate) or cost in $ per TEU, while the horizontal axis shows the
number of boxes shipped per trip.
The liner company must charge a price that covers its costs. If this objective is
not achieved, in due course it will go out of business. Costs may be fixed or
variable. In this simplified case the $40,000 per day cost of the ship is a fixed cost10
because the company is committed to running the service regardless of cargo
volume, while the cargo handling costs can be termed variable costs because these
are not incurred if there is no cargo. This is a great simplification, but serves to
illustrate the principle (we will discuss the matter in more detail later in the chapter).
Because the company is already committed to the costs of the voyage, when the
ship is part empty the only additional cost of accepting another container is the
$400 per container cost of cargo handling. This is known as the marginal cost
(MC). Once the ship is full the marginal cost rises sharply to, say, $2,500 per
container, the cost of chartering another ship or hiring slots on another vessel. This
is shown by the marginal cost curve (MC) in Figure 10.1. Note that the MC curve
is horizontal at $400 from 1500 TEU to 4,000 TEU when the ship is fully loaded
and the MC curve moves up vertically to $2,500 per TEU. Also shown in Figure
10.1 is the average cost curve (AC), which shows, at each output level, the fixed
and variable costs divided by the cargo volume. At low throughput levels the
average cost is very high because a small number of containers must absorb the
total cost of the ship. For example when the ship is only carrying 1,500 containers
the average cost is $2,400 per TEU, but as the load factor increases the average
cost falls steadily to $1,150 per TEU when the ship is full.
Case 1: marginal cost prices
To make a profit, the liner company must generate enough revenue to cover the
average cost. Figure 10.1 shows what happens in a free market (i.e. without
conferences). When there is more shipping space than cargo, which is represented

345
FIGURE 10.1 Liner pricing case 1: marginal cost pricing
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
FIGURE 10.2 Liner pricing case 2: fixed pricing
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF LINER OPERATION

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
346
by the demand curve D1, the liner companies bid against each other for the available
cargo. As they undercut each other the price falls to the marginal cost which in this
example is $400 per TEU (i.e. the handling cost). At this price the cargo volume
is 3,400 TEU, the point where the demand curve (D1) intersects the marginal cost
curve. This is well below the average cost (AC) which at this throughput level is
$1,250 per TEU, so the company makes a loss of $850 per container. With 3,400
containers to transport, that works out at a loss for the voyage of $2.9 million.
When demand is high (D2) the price rises sharply to $2,250 per TEU as shippers
bid for the limited 4,000 TEU capacity. At this volume the average cost is $1,150
per TEU, so the company makes a profit of $1,100 per container, which works out
at $4.4 million on the voyage. To survive in a volatile market with prices determined
by competition, the liner company must make enough profit during the good years
to subsidize its operations during the bad years. In this case the profit of $4.4
million in the boom more than compensates for the $2.9 million loss in the recession,
leaving a surplus of $1.5 million. Although cashflow will be very volatile, over a
period of time the entry and exit of liner companies should regulate the level of
profit ensuring an adequate, but not excessive, return to efficient companies. That
at least is the theory.
Case 2: fixed prices
The alternative strategy is for liner companies to fix prices at a level which gives
a reasonable margin over average cost. We see the consequences of this approach
in Figure 10.2 which has the same demand and supply curves. Suppose the company
decides to impose a fixed price of $1,250 per TEU, shown by the dotted line.
During the recession at a price of $1,250 per TEU demand falls to about 3,250 per
TEU (see intercept between D1 and the price curve). At this cargo volume the
average cost is $1,350 per TEU, so the company makes a loss of $100 per TEU or
$0.3 million on the voyage. During the boom (D2) at a price of $1,250 per TEU
demand rises to $4,250 per TEU (see intercept between D2 and the price curve).
Since the ship can only carry 4,000 TEU at an average cost of $1,150 per TEU,
the voyage makes a profit of $100 per TEU or $0.4 million on the voyage. Thus
at this price of $1,250 the company makes a net profit of $0.1 million on the two
voyages, which is not as much as they would have made under the marginal cost
pricing case. It seems they misjudged the price they should fix.
If the fixed prices are judged correctly and strictly maintained this policy offers
a practical way of stabilizing cashflow. The company makes a smaller loss during
the recession, and a smaller profit during the boom. Compared with the free market
case, the cashflow cycles are reduced and customers have the benefit of stable
prices. If there is free entry to the trade, the company does not end up making
excess profits because new firms enter and old firms expand capacity, wiping out
the excess profits.
This is the positive side of price fixing. Making it work is an economist’s
nightmare. Fixed prices can only work if most shipowners comply with the policy.
With prices way above marginal cost during the recession, individual companies
have a tremendous incentive to drop their prices and fill their ships. Thus the

347
‘price ring’ is under continuous pressure. Even worse, during the boom there is a
risk that outsiders will pile into the trade, soaking up the premium cargo at profitable
prices. If strict discipline cannot be enforced, the cartel is squeezed in both directions.
Because each route is just a small island in a sea of liner capacity, efforts to enforce
discipline from within or without are easily frustrated.
An example puts the problem into perspective. Suppose there are three ships in a
service, two in a conference (i.e. cartel) and the third an ‘outsider’. Trade is depressed
and there is enough cargo to load 3,000 TEU per ship. If the conference holds, each
ship charges a fixed price of $1,200 per TEU and loads 3,000 TEU, making a small
profit of $0.4 million on the voyage. If, however, the outsider offers a price of
$1,100 per TEU, the whole picture changes. At this price he will win enough cargo
to fill his 4,000 TEU ship, so his average cost falls to $800 per container and his
voyage profit increases to $1.2 million. The conference members are left with only
2,500 TEU each. At this volume their average cost rises to $1,200 per TEU, so their
profit is wiped out. It has been hijacked by the outsider and there is nothing they can
do about it. The examples we have considered so far relate to market cycles. Exactly
the same principles apply to seasonal cycles or trade imbalances.
Case 3: price discrimination
The third pricing option is price discrimination. One of the benefits of marginal
cost pricing is that flexible prices help to co-ordinate cargo volume with the available
capacity. Thus the low price during the recession in Figure 10.1 draws in marginal
cargoes such as waste paper, hay or building blocks, helping to fill up empty ships
and generate extra revenue. As a result the cargo volume in the recession is 3,400
TEU compared with only 3,250 when the price is fixed at $1,250 per TEU.
Conversely during booms, high prices discourage cargo that will not bear the
freight, rationing the scarce capacity to priority cargo, whereas the fixed price
leaves the liner company with demand for 4,250 TEU of demand, but only 4,000
slots. From this viewpoint flexible prices bring a positive benefit to the shipper
and the liner company. One way to get the best of both worlds is to offer different
prices for each commodity. Economists refer to this approach as price discrimination
and it is widely used in the transport system (e.g. business class versus economy
class on the airlines). Low value cargoes are offered cheap transport to fill empty
capacity, while higher value cargoes are charged a premium. Commodity price
discrimination is widely used by liner companies, though it has become more
difficult since containerization has standardized the physical cargo. Price
discrimination can also be applied to customers. For example, special rates may be
offered to customers who have large volumes of cargo. With all price discrimination
the key is ensuring that the marginal revenue obtained from the cargo fully
compensates the company for the cost of the service, including such hidden costs
as repositioning containers. This is known as ‘yield management’.
This economic analysis demonstrates the dilemma facing managers in the liner
business. They are ‘between a rock and a hard place’. They have a diverse customer
base, regular schedules, an inflexible investment in ships, and an administrative
overhead. In a free market, trade cycles, seasonal cycles and trade imbalances produce
ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES OF LINER OPERATION

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
348
highly volatile revenues. Living with a volatile cashflow is not particularly attractive
and since they are in a position to form cartels this is an obvious strategy. As we have
seen, efforts to take over from the market and ‘manage’ prices or capacity present
great problems. Economic forces do not favour stable liner price cartels. Companies
which break the price ring reap such handsome profits at the expense of the cartel
members that restraint never lasts long, especially in the age of containerization.
With bank managers to pay, shareholder pressure for higher returns, or a government
sponsor keen to see its domestic shipping company take a bigger share of the trade,
there are too many temptations. In an industry where the barriers to entry are low,
rate stability must be the exception rather than the rule.
Despite these difficulties the quest continues. Over the years managers in the
liner business have come up with a bewildering array of solutions. Some
concentrated on the revenue side, seeking to fix prices for the whole trade, often
supported by a complex arrangement of loyalty rebates, commodity discounts,
service agreements offering special rates to major clients and other devices designed
to blend fixed pricing with a degree of flexibility. Others have tackled capacity,
attempting to strike at the root of the problem by fixing trade shares so that companies
cannot compete for each other’s cargo. From time to time there have been inter-
company agreements to share shipping space and increase flexibility. There have
always been some major companies who have preferred independence and the free
market, but one way or another most liner companies end up seeking ways to
restrict market forces. In the next section we discuss these arrangements. Because
they are constantly changing they are not easy to analyse or classify. We briefly
review their history, more as an illustration of what can happen than a definitive
account of the system.
10.4 Liner conferences and their regulation
The conference system, which was developed in the mid-18 70s, was the industry’s
first attempt to deal with the pricing problem. The major British shipping companies
such as P&O, Alfred Holt and Glen Line who set up the first liner services to the
Far East in the early 1870s, found that, from the outset, competition was forcing
tariffs to levels that would not cover their average costs. They faced all the problems
mentioned in the previous section. There was over-capacity due to over-building;
the trades were highly seasonal, particularly in agricultural products such as tea, so
for part of the year the ships were only half full; and there was also an imbalance
between the east-bound and the west-bound trade with the demand for shipping
space to China falling short of the demand from China.11 As a result there was
often more shipping capacity than cargo. Of course none of this was new. What
had changed was the organization of the business. Because the newly emerging
liner companies were operating regularly in the same trades they were in a much
better position to form a cartel to fix rates so that, in the words of John Swire, ‘the
companies may not ruin each other’.12
The first conference was formed in August 1875 by the lines trading between the
United Kingdom and Calcutta. It was agreed to charge similar rates, to limit the
number of sailings, to grant no preferences or concessions to any shippers and to sail

349
on a given date regardless of whether they had a fall load of cargo.13 However,
because of the over-tonnaging situation, this simply resulted in the major shippers,
particularly the powerful Manchester merchants, threatening to use vessels outside
the conference that would offer lower rates.14 A custom already existed that the
charge made for the use of ship’s gear in loading and unloading was remitted to
merchants who shipped regularly with the same company. In 1877 the conference
developed this into the rebate system. A reduction in rates of 10 per cent was made to
merchants who shipped exclusively with the conference for a period of six months,
but the rebate was not paid until a further six months had elapsed, during which time
the loyalty rebate was forfeit if the merchant used a ship owned by a firm not a
member of the conference.15 This meant that any shipper tempted by the cut-price
rates of non-conference operators stood to lose a very substantial sum if they accepted.
This was only the beginning. Over the next century there was a constantly
evolving network of agreements covering rates, the number of sailings, the ports
served, the goods carried, and the sharing of freight revenues (‘pool’ agreements).
Closed conferences control membership, share cargo and use price discrimination
to encourage the major shippers to ship exclusively with the conference. For
example, regular shippers might be charged a lower ‘contract’ rate, with a higher
rate for shippers who sometimes used outsiders. The ‘deferred rebate’ developed
in the Calcutta trade was also used. Loyal shippers receive a cash rebate, say 9.5
per cent. Open conferences allow any company to join provided they comply with
the rate agreements. Members are thus guaranteed the prices set by the conference
but, since there is no control on the number of ships in service, open conferences
are more vulnerable to over-tonnaging. By the early 1970s there were more than
360 conferences with membership varying from 2 to 40 shipping lines.16
Regulatory control of liner cartels
From the outset conferences were constantly under attack. In 1879 the China
Mail, a Hong Kong paper, set the tone for a debate which lasted a century by
describing the China Conference as ‘one of the most ill-advised and arbitrary
attempts at monopoly which has been seen for many a year’.17 The first legal
challenge came in 1887 when the Mogul Line sought an injunction to stop the Far
East Freight Conference from refusing rebates to shippers using Mogul vessels. At
that time the Far East Freight Conference had seven members. In 1885 Mogul
Line had applied for admission to the conference, but was refused because Mogul
ships did not bear a full share of running regular services at off-peak periods. This
refusal led to a rate war during which the conference’s Shanghai agents issued a
circular warning that any shippers using Mogul ships would forfeit their rebates.
Mogul went to law and sought an injunction to stop the conference from refusing
the rebates, but the application was refused, confirming the legality of the
conference. Some years later, the Royal Commission on Shipping Rings was set
up to investigate the rebate system. Its report in 1909 again confirmed that the
commercial relationship between shippers and conferences was justified and that
the possible abuses of the deferred rebate system should be tolerated in the interests
of achieving a strong liner system.18
LINER CONFERENCES AND THEIR REGULATION

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
350
The conference system reached its peak during the 1950s. The prominence
which the conferences had achieved by this time is demonstrated by the UNCTAD
Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences which was initiated at the first UNCTAD
conference in Geneva in 1964 (see Chapter 12, section 12.9). Many of the developing
countries which had gained independence during the previous decade had balance
of payments problems and were searching for solutions. Sea freight played an
important part in the price of the primary exports on which most of them relied. In
addition the freight itself was a drain on their scarce foreign currency reserves.
Setting up a national shipping line seemed the obvious solution to both problems.
However, the liner conferences were not generally sympathetic and the emerging
nations lacked the experience in the liner business to press their case. This lead to
political action by the ‘Group of 77’ (a pressure group of developing countries
within UNCTAD). The result was the UNCTAD Code which aimed to give each
country the right to participate in the liner conferences servicing its trade.
The UNCTAD Code covers four major areas of liner shipping. It provides the
right to automatic conference membership for the national shipping lines of the
countries served by the conference. A cargo-sharing formula gives national shipping
lines equal rights to participate in the volume of traffic generated by their mutual
trade with third parties carrying the residual. For example, under a 40:40:20 cargo
sharing agreement the bilateral traders reserve 40 per cent of the cargo for their
national vessels and ‘cross traders’ carry the remaining 20 per cent of the cargo.
Finally, shipping conferences are required to consult shippers over rates and national
lines have the right of consent on all major conference decisions affecting the
countries serviced.
The Code took almost 20 years to develop and by the time it came into force in
1983 the liner business had changed out of all recognition. It has never been
ratified by the United States and implementing a convention of this complexity,
which involves agreeing and measuring trade shares, has proved too great a
challenge. Despite this, the Code has two significant achievements to its credit.
The first is that it gave rights to the Third World shipping industry at a time when
this recognition was needed. Second, it was the first international attempt to regulate
the extensive, and over-weighty, system of closed conferences. By opening the
conferences to new participants, it weakened the tight control which had developed
and set the scene for a new regulatory attitude towards the conference system.
During the next 15 years the political climate became progressively less tolerant
of liner cartels. In the mid-1980s the system was examined by regulators in the US
and Europe. The conference system survived, but only just. Under US anti-trust
laws, agreements which restrict competition are illegal. The US Merchant Shipping
Act (1984) re-affirmed that conferences were excluded from anti-trust legislation
and legitimized inter-modal rate making, but placed severe limitations on their
activities. Closed conferences and loyalty rebates became illegal and strict limitations
were placed on price fixing. All tariffs fixed by US conferences must be filed with
the Federal Maritime Commission and all service contracts made be public. In
1986 the European Commission Competition Directorate implemented EC
Regulation 4056 which excluded conferences from European anti-trust law. Rebates
remained legal, but by the late 1980s the system had become seriously weakened.19

351
This legislation weakened the conference system and changed its role, but efforts
to resolve the pricing problem continue as actively as they did a century ago, to the
general disapproval of regulatory authorities. On the Pacific route a series of
stabilization agreements were developed, no longer called conferences, the first
being the Trans Pacific Discussion Agreement (TPDA). On the Atlantic the Trans
Atlantic Agreement (TAA) subsequently became the Trans Atlantic Conference
Agreement (TACA). In the mid-1990s about 60 per cent of the liner capacity on
the major routes belonged to some sort of conference system, though the modern
open conferences are very different from the tightly controlled closed conferences
of the 1950s. Some act mainly as secretariat to the trades, administering rate
agreements and dealing with the various regulatory bodies. As containerization
has weakened the industry’s ability to enforce price cartels, and the regulatory
environment has become less sympathetic, attention has increasingly switched to
strategies for reducing unit costs through consortia, alliances, and mergers which
generate economies of scale.
10.5 The components of liner service costs
Costs lie at the heart of liner service economics and now it is time to look at them
from a more practical viewpoint. We will approach the task in two stages. Stage
one establishes the six ‘building blocks’ from which liner service costs are
constructed, while stage two uses these costs to construct a service cash flow model
similar to the one used to analyse the bulk shipping industry in Chapter 5. This
model shows how the cost and revenue elements fit together, and their implications
for the business, especially economies of scale. As an example we will take a liner
service operating on the North Atlantic and compare the cost structure for four
different sizes of ship, 1,200 TEU, 2,600 TEU, 4,000 TEU and 6,500 TEU. The
six cost building blocks are summarized in Table 10.3, while the ‘service cashflow
analysis’ is shown in Table 10.4. Of course liner companies operate many services
and their published accounts are far more complex than this simple example.
However it serves the important function of identifying the key economic variables
which are the basis of management decision making.
The six building blocks of line costs
The six components of liner service costs listed in Table 10.3 are the service
schedule; ship costs; port charges (including cargo working); container operations;
container costs; and administration. This is not a classification which appears in
the accounts of any liner company, but it is a useful way of grouping cost variables
to discuss their role in the business.
The logical starting point for liner cost analysis is the service schedule (Table
10.3, section 1), since this sets the inflexible framework of transport capacity per
annum around which costs are incurred. There are three key decisions for service
planners to make, the service frequency, the number of port calls and the size of
the ships to be used. In the example in Table 10.3 the service frequency is weekly
and there are seven port calls on the round voyage (e.g. Rotterdam, Le Havre,
THE COMPONENTS OF LINER SERVICE COSTS

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
352
TABLE 10.3 The six building blocks of liner costs
  Source: Various, but particularly Drewry Shipping Consultants (1996)

353
TABLE 10.4 The liner service cash flow model
Note: 1 based on the number of containers shipped outward and back shown in Table 10.3, section 1

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
354
New York, Baltimore, Norfolk, Bremerhaven, Felixstowe). The capacity calculation
is repeated for four ship sizes (1,200 TEU, 2,600 TEU, 4,000 TEU, 6,500 TEU).
With a round-voyage distance of 8,500 miles a single ship can make one round
voyage every 28 days if it averages 19 knots. To run a weekly service, four ships
are needed. However, there are plenty of choices open to service operators if they
vary the speed or the number of port calls. If only one port call is made at each end
of the journey, the round trip could be reduced to 21 days, and the route can be
serviced with only three ships, which would be cheaper. Alternatively, it might be
argued by the marketing department that to service the trade properly ten port
calls are needed rather than seven. Since each port call takes an average of 1.35
days, this would extend the round voyage time to 32.1 days, which would not fit
conveniently with a weekly schedule. Increasing the speed to 24 knots would cut
the voyage time back to 28 days, but that would be a punishing schedule for the
ships and would incur higher capital and bunker costs. These are difficult decisions,
with crucial cost implications.
Once the voyage cycle has been fixed, the remaining variable is the size of ship
to be used. This depends on how much cargo the company thinks it can win, how
much headroom it allows for future volume growth and any cargo imbalances on
different legs of the route. In this example we assume that there is 80 per cent
capacity utilization on the outward leg and 90 per cent on the return leg. At these
capacity levels a weekly service could transport an annual cargo volume of 230,471
TEU using a 2,600 TEU ship and 576,179 TEU for the 6,500 TEU vessel. Which
ship size should the service planners select?
This question leads on to the second building block, the ship cost. This variable
is usually expressed in terms of the unit slot cost (i.e. the daily cost of providing
one TEU of transport capacity on the route). Now we are on familiar territory.
The calculation of the unit cost per TEU in dollars per day shown in Table 10.3.
Section 2 is built up from operating cost, capital cost, and fuel consumption in just
the same way as the costs for the bulk vessels in Chapter 5. For the new 2,600
TEU ship in this example the operating cost is $6,650 per day, the capital cost
$14,959 per day and the bunker cost $7,150 per day. These costs depend substantially
on the investment decisions of the shipowner. There is a trade-off between capital
costs and operating costs which we discussed in detail for bulk vessels in Chapter
5. Modern ships cost less to run but more to finance, so unit slot costs depend on
the age profile of the fleet as well as the size of the ships. Since bunker costs are
substantially higher for container ships than bulk vessels, due to their higher speed,
fuel consumption is a particularly important variable.
The impact of economies of scale is clear from the unit slot cost, expressed in $/
TEU/day, shown at the end of section 2 in Table 10.3. For a 1,200 TEU vessel the
daily cost is $16.6/TEU/day, but the cost falls sharply to $11.1/TEU/day for a
2,600 TEU vessel, $9.5/TEU/day for a 4,000 TEU vessel and $7.5/TEU/day for
the 6,500 TEU vessel. A clear case of economies of scale, but with diminishing
marginal returns. The first step up in size to 2,600 TEU cuts the slot cost by $5.5,
but the same 1,400 TEU size increase to 4,000 TEU only saves $1.6/TEU.
Port charges (Table 10.3, section 3) are an item over which the shipowner has
less control, since they vary considerably around the world. Since port charges

355
are generally levied on the basis of the ship’s tonnage, this introduces an additional
element of economies of scale, since the port costs/teu reduces as the ship gets
bigger. In Table 10.3, section 3, we assume a reduction in the port costs/teu from
$18 for the 1,200 teu ship to $7 for the 6,500 TEU ship. Liner operators have a
considerable incentive to develop ship designs with a low tonnage relative to
their container capacity, especially for distribution trades where the vessels make
many portcalls. This encourages designs with a low deadweight and gross tonnage
per teu.
The fourth building block of liner costs is container operations (Table 10.3,
section 4). To run a liner business, the service operator must supply and manage a
stock of containers to support the cargo flow. The decisions taken set the framework
for the container costs. There are three important issues that arise at the operational
level. First, there is the question of obtaining the right mix of container types. As
we saw earlier in the chapter, there are many different sizes of containers, including
general purpose and specialized designs. These must be available for delivery to
the customer as required. The example in Table 10.3 section 4 splits 37 per cent 20
ft containers, 57 per cent 40 ft containers and 6 per cent refrigerated units. This is
fairly typical of the North Atlantic route, though the balance in other trades is
different. For example on the long Pacific journey the proportion of 40 ft containers
increases to 80 per cent. There may also be a requirement to supply specialized
containers, for example open top containers or tanks. Most liner companies own a
substantial proportion of their containers, since this is generally the cheapest option,
leasing a proportion, say 20–30 per cent. Second, there is the issue of container
turn-around. Between voyages the containers are delivered to the customer,
following which they must be collected and repositioned for the next cargo. This
calls for a container stock which is substantially greater than the container capacity
of the vessels employed in the trade. In this example we assume a 75 days turn-
around time for the cycle, of which 28 days are spent at sea and 47 days in transit
to and from the customer. Naturally this will vary a great deal with the trade.
Third, where trade imbalances exist empty containers must be repositioned inter-
regionally so that they are available for loading cargo. In this example we assume
that capacity utilization on the return leg is 10 per cent higher than on the outward
leg, so 10 per cent of the containers must be repositioned empty. This offers a
classic opportunity for marginal cost pricing. If the container is travelling empty,
any cargo which will pay the handling charges is worth carrying. Hay, waste
paper, building blocks, animal feeds and a host of other cargoes fall into this
category. The danger arises when these marginal cargoes create hidden costs which
are unseen by the salesman and end up being shipped at a loss.
When we turn to the fifth building block, container costs (Table 10.3, section
5), we must consider the daily cost of the containers; maintenance and repair;
terminal costs for container handling (i.e. the cost of handling it on and off the
vessel); various on-shipment costs, including trans-shipment by sea or inland;
repositioning empty containers between zones; and cargo claims.
The cost of the container itself depends on the purchase price, its economic life
and the method of finance. In the mid-1990s a 20 ft container cost about $2,400
and a 40 ft container about $3,900. Refrigerated containers are much more expensive,
THE COMPONENTS OF LINER SERVICE COSTS

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
356
costing $21,000 for a 20 ft unit. In practice containers have an average life of 12–
16 years, at the end of which they have a scrap value of several hundred dollars.
On these parameters the daily cost of a container can be calculated, working out at
about 90 cents per day for a 20 ft unit and $1.40 per day for a 40 ft unit. Like
ships, containers and other equipment require continuous maintenance, for which
an annual budget must be allowed.
Container handling and through transport costs vary enormously. Terminal costs
differ from one region to another. For example in 1995 handling a 40 ft container
in Singapore cost about $150, compared with $350 per lift in Japan. Terminals
generally charge up to 50 per cent extra for handling a 40 ft box, though, for
simplicity, the handling charges in Table 10.3 are limited to a single rate of $200
per lift. Refrigerated containers also require special terminal services which are
costed here at $150 per unit. The on-shipment of the container is dealt with under
three headings, transhipment by sea, inland inter-modal transport and inter-zone
repositioning. These costs depend specifically on the trade and the method of
pricing adopted by the company. Some operators charge separately for delivery, in
which case the freight rate does not include the cost of on-transport. Other carriers
offer ‘door-to-door’ rates. Since some cost will certainly be incurred, Table 10.3
assumes values of $225/TEU for transhipment, $150 for inland transport, and
$150 for interzonal repositioning when regional imbalances appear and the containers
have to be shipped to a different part of the world. Finally there is an item for
cargo claims. Concluding the discussion on container costs, perhaps the most
significant feature is that because these costs are based on the standard container,
they are not subject to economies of scale. The 6,500 TEU ship faces the same unit
costs as the 1,000 TEU ship.
Finally there is administration costs (Table 10.3, section 6). Somehow the
shipping company must recover the cost of the administrative function which is
required to operate a container service. A simple way to do this is to ‘charge out’
an administration cost to each vessel on a proportional basis which will recover the
full overheads of the company. Some idea of the nature of these costs is given by
the organization chart in Figure 10.3. The five main functional activities are as
follows:
•  Marine Operations: This covers the management of the ships, scheduling,
cargo stowage and terminal management.
•  Logistics: Responsible for the overall maintenance and control of the company’s
fleet of own and leased containers, including maintenance, repair and scheduling.
•  Finance: A major activity including voyage accounts (e.g. booking, rating,
tracking, billing, etc.) EDP, management accounts and budgeting.
•  Commercial: This covers the booking and documentation of cargo, plus dealing
with conferences where appropriate.
•  Sales: This function sets the pricing, PR and advertising and deals with agents.
Some companies carry out all of these activities themselves, while smaller companies
sub-contract. As a result the numbers on the payroll vary a great deal. For example,
ACL, which in 1995 shipped 224,000 containers on the North Atlantic, employs a

357
staff of about 380, which works out at a throughput of 588 TEU per employee.
The salary cost was $91/TEU. However, the ACL traffic included ro-ro cargo, so
it is not a pure container service. Typically for major liner companies with a full
range of activities, the administrative cost is in the range $100–200/TEU. The
example in Table 10.3, section 6, builds in an element of economies of scale
because staff levels increase less than proportionally with the service volume,
resulting in a falling administration cost from $100/TEU for the 1,200 TEU ship
to $42/TEU for the 6,500 TEU ship.
10.6 The liner service cashflow model
Now we come to stage 2 which involves combining the cost information with
revenue to show how these determine the financial performance of a liner service.
The service cashflow model shown in Table 10.4 takes the detailed cost information
from Table 10.3 and summarizes it into four components, the fixed cost of the
FIGURE 10.3 Liner company organization
Source: Compiled by Martin Stopford from various sources
THE LINER SERVICE CASHFLOW MODEL

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
358
ships (section 1), the cost of the containers (section 2), the administration cost
(section 3) and the cargo handling and onward transport cost (section 4). From
these items we calculate the voyage cost per TEU in section 5, then add the voyage
revenue in section 6 to calculate the voyage profit or loss in section 7. Finally, to
show how costs and profits change with ship size, Table 10.4 compares four different
vessels, a 1,200 TEU ship, a 2,600 TEU ship, a 4,000 TEU ship and a 6,500 ship.
We will now discuss each of these items in more detail.
The fixed costs of the ship shown in section 1 of Table 10.4 demonstrate why
economies of scale are so important to liner operators. The total cost of the 6,500
TEU ship is almost three times the cost of the 1,200 ship, but the cargo volume is
almost six times as great. As the size of ship increases the fixed cost component falls
from 42 per cent to 26 per cent. In contrast the fixed cost of the containers shown in
section 2 of Table 10.4 does not benefit from economies of scale, so its share increases
from 14 per cent of total cost for the 1,200 TEU ship to 19 per cent for the 6,500
TEU ship. Administration costs shown in section 3 of Table 10.4, which are charged
out on each TEU shipped, fall from 8 per cent to 4 per cent. Finally the various cargo
handling and distribution costs (section 4 of Table 10.4) do not benefit from economies
of scale, with the result that their share of the budget increases from 37 per cent for
the 1,200 TEU ship to 51 per cent for the 6,500 TEU ship.
Drawing these costs together in section 5 of Table 10.4 the average cost per
TEU falls from $771 for the 1,200 TEU vessel to $554 for the 6,500 TEU vessel.
In this particular case the freight rate shown in section 6 of Table 10.4 is $820 per
TEU on the outward leg and $750 per TEU on the return leg. At these cargo levels
the 1,200 TEU vessel makes a profit of $25,000, a 2 per cent return, while the
6,500 TEU vessel makes a profit of $2.53 million and a return of 29 per cent. That
is, provided the company can fill the ship. In reality what generally happens is that
liner companies order bigger ships, bid competitively for cargo to fill them and
slowly the price per TEU falls towards average cost. Once the 6,500 TEU vessels
are in service the freight rates fall progressively towards $500 per TEU, the average
cost. Very bad news for any owners who try to hang on with their 1,200 TEU
ships. At that freight rate they would lose heavily on the voyage. That is precisely
what the liner business is all about.
10.7 Liner prices
Now we come to the question of pricing for liner services. Ultimately liner prices,
like bulk freight rates, are determined by competition in the market-place. Shipping
is a free business which companies may enter or leave as they wish. However, as
we saw earlier in the chapter, the price-making process is more complex than for
the bulk industry and the procedures are constantly changing in response to
competitive and regulatory pressures.
During the cargo liner era a very centralized system was developed for handling
pricing. Liner conferences were firmly established and in most trades they conducted
the price negotiations, usually with a central body representing the shippers, for
example a shippers’ council. They would meet regularly to negotiate rates and
agree ‘General Rate Increases’ (GRIs). Outsiders, accounting for a small or a large

359
share of the trade, followed an independent pricing policy. The introduction of
containerization has diluted this process. Conferences still exist, but the price-
making has become less structured, passing to a variety of discussion agreements,
alliances and negotiated service agreements.
Most liner companies still build their pricing policy around the dual principles of
price stability and price discrimination. The case for price stability is obvious. Liner
companies have a fixed overhead, so why not fix prices? Anyway, with so many
customers, negotiating every price is not practical. Ideally once prices are set, they
should change only when there is some valid reason for doing so, such as an increase
in the cost of providing the service or a major change in the underlying unit costs.
The case for commodity price discrimination is equally obvious. Charge higher
rates to commodities which can bear the cost, and discount low value commodities.
This enables the liner company to attract a wider range of cargoes than would be
economic if there was a single standard freight charge. By increasing the volume, the
companies can use larger ships and offer more regular sailings. In this way it is
argued that the pricing policy supports the provision of a better service package for
all customers, though the role of cross-subsidization remains one of active debate.
The second type of price discrimination is between customers. Large customers,
with whom it is worth negotiating, can be offered special discounts (e.g. a ‘service
agreement’) while the smaller customers continue to pay the regular tariff.
The method used to implement the commodity pricing system is the tariff
which defines the price classes, typically ten to thirty in number, for which different
rates are charged. Each commodity is listed in the rate book, showing the price
class to which it is assigned. Thus the freight rate for a particular cargo is worked
out by looking up the rate for the commodity, multiplying by the amount to be
shipped, say 209.5 cubic metres, and adding any additionals. Containerization has
made it much more difficult to enforce this system. If it costs $10,000 to ship a 20
ft container when the shipper knows that boxes are being shipped on the same
service for $1,500, it is bound to cause price resistance.20 Many liner companies
now charge a standard box rate or apply a FAK (freight all kinds) tariff. Ultimately
it is a matter of what the market will bear, though the discussion of price
discrimination showed that the FAK system has disadvantages. Some shippers are
more price sensitive than others. An auto parts distributor might value reliability
and service, while for the shipper of a price sensitive product like cellophane rolls,
the freight rate is more important. In a complex business offering a differentiated
transport product there is certainly a case for a degree of price discrimination. The
product and the pricing system must both be adapted to the client’s needs.
Even with a FAK rate, the procedure for quoting the customer a freight charge
and preparing an invoice is quite complex because liner companies charge separately
for items which they regard as ‘additional’ to the basic transport service they
provide. Typically the invoice sent to a customer will include some or all of the
following items:
•  Freight charges: The charge for transporting the box or cargo. Sometimes the
customer is quoted a ‘door to door’ rate, but often there are separate charges
for port-to-port transport, and collection or delivery.
LINER PRICES

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
360
•  Sea freight additionals: Surcharges to cover unbudgeted costs incurred by the
liner company. The bunker adjustment factor (baf) covers unexpected increases
in the cost of bunker fuel, which accounts for a major proportion of operating
costs on long routes. Currency adjustment factor (caf) covers currency
fluctuations. The currency adjustment factor is based on an agreed basket of
costs and is designed to keep tariff revenue the same, regardless of changes
between the tariff currency rates of exchange. Port congestion surcharges may
be charged if a particular port becomes difficult to access due to congestion.
•  Terminal handling charge (THC): These are charged per container handled in
local currency per container to cover the cost of handling the container in the
port. Within a region, ports may have different charges. Some operators absorb
THCs into the through freight rate.
•  Service additionals: If the shipper undertakes additional services for the
customer—for example, storage of goods, customs clearance or trans-
shipment—there would be an additional charge for this.
•  Cargo additionals: Some cargoes attract additional charges because they are
difficult or expensive to transport. For example an open top container, heavy
lift, etc.
To simplify the charging process some companies may negotiate special contracts
with major customers, offering discounts on volume or other concessions. These
are known as Service Contracts.
10.8 The demand for liner services
General cargo and container movements
So far we have concentrated on the economics of transporting general cargo. Now
it is time to look more closely at the cargo liners carry. In Chapter 1 we discussed
how seaborne trade splits between bulk cargo and general cargo which we defined
as cargo parcels that are too small for bulk shipment.21 This is a business in which
the customers have widely differing transport requirements and the cargoes are
tremendously varied, ranging from television sets to building blocks.
Some cargoes are high value (typically $5,000–10,000 a ton). Manufactured
and semi-manufactured products—consumer goods, machinery, textiles, chemicals
and vehicles fall into this category. For the most part these have too high a value
and too low a volume to travel by any other service than liner, though if enough
cargo is available bulk shipment may be viable. The motor vehicle trade is a
classic example, and the liner business has lost much lucrative cargo to car carriers
in recent decades. There is also intense competition for these cargoes from the air
freight transport industry, especially on long routes where the time saving of air
transport is a strong selling point. Clothing shipped from the Far East to Europe,
or electrical components are the sort of cargoes that fall into this area. Sea—air
services have now stripped some of the business from the Asia-Europe trade.
At the other end of the scale are the low value cargoes such as steel products, forest
products, building materials, foodstuffs such as coffee or empty gas canisters. These

361
are the cargoes for which liner companies compete with other transport operators,
particularly specialist shipowners such as chemical parcel tankers, reefers, pure car
carriers and open hatch bulk carriers. Although these cargoes do not support high
freight rates they are a valuable source of marginal revenue for operators pursuing
economies of scale, or on routes where there is an imbalance of cargo.
The growth of containerized cargo between 1966 and 1995 was spectacular. In
the two decades from 1975 to 1994 the volume of containers handled by container
terminals increased from 17.4 million TEUs to 126.6 million TEUs in 1994 (Figure
10.4), a seven-fold increase. Trade doubled in the 1980s and increased by 46 per
cent in the first half of the 1990s. These figures cover total container movements
through ports, including deep sea, feeder, local services and empties. By the mid-
1980s all of the major liner routes had been containerized. However on a few of
the minor routes the small volume of cargo, the extreme imbalance of containerizable
trade, and the continuing availability of multi-purpose ships meant that even in the
1990s some break bulk trades continued to operate.
Analysing the general cargo trade presents difficulties. Commodity analysis is
not really practical, except for a few of the larger trades. In reality the growth of
liner cargo is more closely related to the general growth trend in international
trade which, as we saw in Chapter 7, is driven by the search for lower costs and
greater variety. The improved speed and reliability of the liner services since
containerization and the downward trend in the cost of transport has certainly
contributed to the speed of trade growth. Unfortunately, the statistical database for
analysing these trends is rather thin but, by a process of deduction, we can piece
FIGURE 10.4 Container movements (lifts) 1973–94
Source: Drewry Shipping Consultants
THE DEMAND FOR LINER SERVICES

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
362
together a broad picture of the volume of general cargo. The calculations are
shown in Table 10.5. The total dry cargo trade (column 9) splits into three parts,
dry bulk (column 8), break bulk (column 7) and containerized cargo (column 6).
The containerized cargo, which has grown so rapidly, is estimated from the number
of container lifts by deducting a percentage for empty containers (about 20 per
cent shown in column 3) and for containers which are transhipped, and thus handled
twice on the voyage (22 per cent in 1994, shown in column 4). The number of
container journeys left after making these deductions must be divided by two, to
eliminate the fact that the container is lifted on and off the ship, and multiplied by
the average cargo payload (9.1 tons shown in column 5). In 1994 that gives a
containerized cargo volume of 336 mt, an increase from 109 mt in 1980. In contrast
break bulk cargo shown in column 7 only increased from 418 mt in 1980 to 472
mt in 1994.
TABLE 10.5 The container and break bulk trades 1980–94
  Source: Drewry Shipping Consultants (1996), Table 3.11
Characteristics of demand for liner services
Unlike the bulk shipping business where price dominates the commercial equation,
in the liner business quality of service is often the focus of competition. In practice
there are six aspects of the freight service which shippers consider to be important:

363
•  Freight cost. The charge for transporting the container from origin to
destination, including additionals.
•  Frequency of sailings. Sea transport is one stage in the overall production
process. Frequent sailings offer the manufacturer the opportunity to service
one-off orders rapidly and enable him to reduce the level of stocks held at
each end of the transport operation.
•  Transit time door-to-door. On long voyages, particularly for high-value
products, speed of transit may be a major consideration owing to the cost of
inventory. In this context, air freight may be a significant competitor, particularly
where a shipping time of four weeks is involved in a Far East to Europe
voyage.
•  Reliability of timekeeping. On deep sea routes the liner service is the customer’s
only direct link to his export market. Some customers are likely to value
reliability of service. In terms of the transport service, adherence to fixed day
schedules and on-time pick up and delivery are important.
•  Reliability of administration: Customers value prompt and accurate
administration. The ability to provide timely quotations, accurate bills of lading,
prompt arrival notices, accurate invoices and to resolve problems when they
arise all play a part in the customer’s evaluation of the liner company’s
performance.
•  Space availability. The ability of the service to accept cargo, even at short
notice, may be valued by businesses that are not able to plan their transport
requirements far in advance.
Most shippers look for a combination of these factors, though research suggests
that there is no clear pattern of preferences which applies to all shippers. Surveys
of shipper’s attitudes produce widely differing results.
A survey of 50 shippers in the US domestic trades22 found that timeliness of
service was the most important single factor, but another study of the attitudes of
shippers in North America and Europe found that cost of service and problem-
solving capability were ranked most highly Transit time, which had been placed
third in an earlier survey carried out in 1982, had fallen to seventh place by 1991,
suggesting that priorities change.23 Common sense suggests that this must be the
case. Price will only be a significant decision variable if different prices are quoted
by different companies. More fundamentally, different shippers have different
priorities, depending on the cargo and the nature of their business.
Price and liner demand
Price is particularly important for lower value commodities where the transport
cost contributes to determining whether the trade is viable. For example, a company
distributing large tonnages of low value cellophane rolls to processing plants in
Europe might take the view that as long as they have a reasonable tonnage in the
pipeline at any one time, considerations of service and claims experience are of far
less importance than rate per ton.24 For this type of commodity, prices are subject
to intense competition and liner companies often discount heavily to win the
THE DEMAND FOR LINER SERVICES

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
364
business, especially where they have spare capacity on one leg of the voyage.
Some examples of the price sensitive cargoes that are containerized are given
below:
•  Wool. A high proportion of the wool trade is containerized. Wool is ‘dumped’
(i.e. compressed) into bales which are packed into 20 ft containers, giving an
average container weight of 18 tons.
•  Cotton. US West Coast cotton exports are now containerized. A total of 82
standard dumped bales can be packed into a 40 ft container.
•  Wine is shipped by container either in cases or in 5,000-gallon bulk container
tanks. A 40 ft container can hold 972 cases of 1 litre bottles and 1,200 cases of
750 millilitre bottles.
•  Rubber used to be shipped in bales. To facilitate containerization, some
companies have now adopted standard bale sizes and pack the bales in shrink
film rather than timber crates. Latex is shipped in drums packed in containers.
Service quality and liner demand
For many cargoes, particularly those of high value, the shipper may have far more
to lose if the service is poor than he could possibly gain from squeezing the price
down a few per cent. For example a motor cycle manufacturer exporting its products
world-wide must be able to meet delivery schedules to its dealer network. Frequent
services, sufficient volume of available shipping space, reliable advance information
about vessel arrival and departure times, speed, and responsible management of
cargo landed at the destination are all of crucial importance to a company
distributing its products over a long distance.
We should not be surprised that service requirements now dominate the liner
business. Over the last 30 years international businesses have systematically
tightened the management of product flows and inventory costs, often using ‘just
in time’ control systems. Containerization played a major part in this process by
allowing companies to access global markets through a fast, reliable transport
network. A good example of why customers are willing to pay extra for speed and
reliability is illustrated by a freight forwarder dealing with the motor trade:
We are heavily involved in spare parts traffic for the motor industry where in
recent years inventory stocks have been reduced to the absolute minimum. This
obviously has given quite substantial cost savings to importers and exporters.
But they are prepared to spend some of this cost saving in additional freighting
charges to ensure that their production lines are kept moving.25
Liners are part of a supply system and customers view the cost and benefits of
transport in the context of the business as a whole.
Another service characteristic valued by shippers is strict timekeeping. Even if
the ships are available, keeping to precise schedules is not easy. A survey of
timekeeping of services in North America and the Far East found that in North
America three-quarters of the vessels tracked arrived on or one day after their

365
scheduled time. In the Far East ports 89 per cent of the vessels arrived within a day
of schedule.26 At first sight it might seem surprising that timekeeping presents such
a problem. However, liners work in such diverse conditions that it is difficult to
plan for every contingency. Some delays are caused by breakdowns such as engine
failure, or dry dockings that over-run. Then there are accidents (e.g. a collision),
natural disasters such as earthquakes, adverse weather, and congestion. Many of
these are avoidable at a price. In the long-term powerful ships which can make up
lost time and realistic schedules which incorporate a margin for delays are the
solution. In the short-term skipping ports is a common way of catching up on
schedule, or for serious delays chartering a replacement ship, if one is available.
Containerizing marginal and specialized cargoes
Containerization of low value or specialized cargoes plays an important part in
helping service operators to obtain a balanced cargo payload and new types of
containers have been developed to allow the transportation of low value or non-
standard cargoes. The main types were summarized in Table 10.2. Open-top
containers are used for heavy lift; reefer and ventilated containers are used for
frozen and chilled cargo and various perishable agricultural crops; flat tracks are
used for awkward cargoes; and tanks are used for various bulk liquids such as wine
and chemicals.
Containerizing new cargoes often involves research into packing, stowage and
handling methods. For this reason the speed with which containerization has
penetrated some trades, particularly the minor bulks, depends upon finding practical
ways to allow difficult cargoes to be containerized. Sometimes the problem is the
delicate nature of the cargo. For example confectionary exports from the UK are
containerized using insulated containers which need special handling to avoid
condensation and tainting from previous cargoes.27 Or it might be a matter of
finding a way to reduce the cost by more effective stowage. Most of the motor
cycle export trade from Japan is now containerized. By careful planning and some
dis-assembly, a total of 28 large motor cycles or up to 200 small ones can be
packed into a 40 ft container. This emphasis on efficient stowage led some
manufacturers to take container dimensions into account in their design. However
the trend is not always towards packing more cargo into a container. In the integrated
transport business, what matters is the total cost. High density stowage which calls
for some assembly at the destination can be expensive and difficult to control. As
transport costs have fallen and labour costs have increased many manufacturers
have reverted to shipping motor cycles fully assembled and carefully packed.
A good example of the practicalities of containerizing difficult cargoes is
provided by the export of bulk coffee from Brazil to the US.28 Traditionally coffee
beans were shipped in 60 kg bags, loaded into the hold of a general cargo ship.
When containerization was introduced, the bags were packed into a container.
Problems with condensation were overcome by using ‘dry bags’ which absorbed
the moisture released by the coffee beans and a massive improvement in efficiency
was achieved. Instead of having to individually handle about 250 sacks, the single
THE DEMAND FOR LINER SERVICES

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
366
container is dropped into place in the container ship, an operation taking about
one-and-a-half minutes in a purpose-built container vessel. Then in the mid-1980s
importers started looking for ways to reduce the labour required to ‘stuff ’ and
‘unstuff’ containers with 60 kg bags. Eventually they developed a new cargo
handling system which loaded the container by gravity feed and discharged by a
special chute, taking only a few minutes compared with several hours and a lot
more labour for manual handling. This example illustrates the important point
that containerization does not just save transport costs. It has an impact on packaging
costs and cargo handling costs at either end of the cargo leg.
Finally there is project cargo. Some specific items shipped by liners include,
for example, equipment for two cement plants, electrification projects for Singapore
and Korea, a water filtration plant for Hong Kong, a textile fibre plant for the
Philippines, a telecommunications project for Malaysia and equipment for a mass
transit railway system in Hong Kong.
10.9 The liner shipping routes
Providing liner services that cover the globe is a daunting task. In the ‘Maritime
Transport Study’ the United Nations identified thirty-two maritime coastal regions.
There are 1,024 potential liner routes between these areas. Some of the coastal
regions cover thousands of miles of coastline and all have many ports. The task of
the liner market is to sort out a route network which cost-effectively meets the
changing needs of the shippers in these coastal regions.
The industry generally divides the trade routes into three groups, shown in
Table 10.6. The East-West trades, which account for 44 per cent of the cargo,
circle the globe in the Northern Hemisphere, linking the major industrial centres
of North America, Western Europe and Asia. The North-South trades which operate
mainly between the three major industrial areas and the economies in the Southern
Hemisphere account for another 22 per cent, while the remaining 34 per cent of
the trade is intra-regional cargo, which is shorterhaul and uses smaller ships. This
global network is constantly evolving to meet the changing needs of the world
economy. Because liner services straddle the world in a complex network of arterial
routes, spurs, and feeder services which oflen overlap, it is not possible to describe
the routes in a precise way. The following paragraphs provide a broad description
of the major routes as they exist in the mid-1990s.
By far the largest volume of trade is on the East-West routes. These trades
dominate the liner business. Over the last 20 years they have grown enormously,
underpinning the rapidly expanding trade links between these areas. The routes
provide employment for 60 per cent of the container ship fleet, and for the majority
of ships over 2,000 TEU.
The trans-Pacific trade
Containerization started in the Far East trade in December 1968 when Sea-Land
introduced the container service from Seattle to Yokohama and the Japanese shipping

367
TABLE 10.6 Major liner routes and trade imbalances, 1996
  Source: Drewry Shipping Consultants (1996) various tables
THE LINER SHIPPING ROUTES

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
368
companies introduced six 700/800 TEU container ships into a service between
California and Japan. Now the biggest deep sea liner route is the trans-Pacific
trade between North America and the Far East, with 7.5 million TEU of trade,
representing 22 per cent of the world total. The services operate between North
American ports on the East Coast, the Gulf and the West Coast, to the industrial
centres of Japan and the Far East, with some services extending to the Middle
East. Some of the services to the eastern USA operate direct by water, but in
recent years containers to East Coast US are shipped under one bill of lading to a
US West Coast port and by rail to the East Coast destination, thus avoiding the
Panama transit. On the rail leg containers may be double stacked. There is a
substantial cargo inbalance, with eastbound shipments exceeding westbound
shipments by 22 per cent in 1994.
In 1995, there were about twenty-eight liner companies servicing the trade,
including American companies such as Sea-Land, Japanese companies such as
Mitsui OSK, European companies such as Maersk, and, more recently, national
lines established by Singapore, Taiwan and South Korea. The round voyage for a
vessel calling at four ports in South East Asia and two on the US West Coast is
about 16,500 miles. At a speed of 21 knots the sea time is thirty-two days, with an
additional ten days in port, giving a round journey time forty-two days, or six
weeks. To provide weekly sailings in this trade requires a fleet of six ships, though
some services reduce the number of port calls so as to operate to a five-week round
voyage which can be operated by five ships. The ‘all water’ service to the US East
coast requires nine vessels. Because of the long voyage time the trans-Pacific trade
uses the biggest ships, with many ‘post-Panamax’ vessels over 4,000 TEU on this
service.
The North Atlantic trade
The North Atlantic was the first route containerized in the mid-1960s, as one
might expect since at that time it linked the two major industrial centres of the
world, East Coast North America and Western Europe. In the mid-1990s it had a
trade of 3 million TEU, accounting for 8 per cent of world container trade. There
is an 18 per cent trade imbalance westbound, reflecting the greater volume of
cargo to North America.
Geographically, the North Atlantic trade covers the major European ports of
Gothenburg, Hamburg, Bremerhaven, Antwerp, Rotterdam, Felixstowe and Le
Havre, though there are some other smaller ports included on the itineraries of
certain liner companies. At the North American end of the operation it is organized
into two sections covering North Europe to US Atlantic and North Europe to the
St Lawrence. The principal Canadian ports serviced are Montreal and Halifax,
while in the US Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Hampton Roads,
Wilmington and Charleston are all regular port calls. Some services extend into
the US Gulf.
Typically the round voyage distance is about 8,000 miles which can be completed
in eighteen days at a speed of 19 knots. Allowing ten days for port time, the round

369
trip takes about twenty-eight days. The usual pattern is for larger operators to
offer weekly sailings using a fleet of four or five ships. About twenty-five companies/
consortia offer scheduled services on the North Atlantic. In the North Atlantic, an
open conference prevails, the Trans Atlantic Conference Agreement (TACA) which
was set up in 1995 covering about 60 per cent of the capacity on the trade. Anyone
can join it and there are no trade shares. Out of the twenty operators on the North
Atlantic, about thirteen are conference members, and there is a strong tradition of
non-conference competition in this trade.
Western Europe to the Far East trade
This route covers the trade of North Europe, stretching from Sweden down to St
Nazaire in France to the Far East, comprising West Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand,
Hong Kong, Philippines, Taiwan, South Korea and Japan. As we saw earlier in the
chapter, it was one of the first trades to be covered by a conference system, the Far
East Freight Conference (FEFC). In 1995 there were about twenty-one operators
or consortiums running 200 ships on the trade, of which about half are members
of the FEFC and the other half are ‘outsiders’.
Three major operators in the Far East trade are the Grand Alliance composed of
P&O, NYK, Neptune Orient Lines and Hapag-Lloyd; the Global Alliance consisting
of MOL, Nedlloyd, OOCL, APL and MISC; and Maersk/Sea-Land. The round
voyage time is sixty-three days, requiring nine ships to provide a weekly sailing.
The major operators run separate weekly services direct to Japan and Korea, and
to South East Asia. It is the large number of ships required to operate a regular
service in this trade that necessitated the development of consortia. A typical round
voyage would involve calling at four European ports (for example, Le Havre,
Rotterdam, Southampton, and Hamburg), Singapore and four or five other ports
in South East Asia (for example, Hong Kong, Busan, Osaka, Tokyo, Kaohsiung).
Not all services call at Japan and South Korea, preferring to turn in Hong Kong or
Taiwan instead.
Round the world services
A logical development was to fuse these three main liner routes into a single
global service. In the early 1980s several operators took this step, of which the
most important were Evergreen and United States Lines. Evergreen runs twelve
vessels in each direction around the world with a round trip of eighty days, providing
a ten-day service frequency in each direction. This service was initially introduced
with eight ships in September 1984, but it rapidly became apparent that the ten-
day service compared unfavourably with the seven-day service operated by
competitors, particularly on the North Atlantic. As a result, in 1985 the number of
ships was increased to eleven in each direction, and then to twelve giving a weekly
service with a round trip time of seventy-seven days. The ships used on the service
were G-class vessels of 2,700 TEU which have now been lengthened to 3,428
TEU. In November 1986, the United States Lines’ operation was withdrawn as a
result of the company’s financial difficulties. For some years DSR-Senator and
THE LINER SHIPPING ROUTES

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
370
Cho Yang ran a round-the-world service, but with the notable exception of Evergreen
this method of operation has attracted remarkably few operators.
The round-the-world service follows the three main arterial routes. Going
westbound, after calling at the UK and north continent ports, vessels proceed
down the East Coast of North America through the Panama Canal to the US West
Coast, Japan, the Far East arid through the Suez Canal to the Mediterranean.
The North-South liner routes
The North-South liner services cover the trade between the industrial centres of
Europe, North America and the Far East and the developing countries of Latin
America, Africa, Far East and Australasia. There is also an extensive network of
services between the smaller economies, especially those in the Southern Hemisphere.
These trades, which are listed in Table 10.6, have a very different character. Cargo
volumes are much lower, accounting for only 22 per cent of the container cargo
volume in 1994. However, this understates the importance of these trades to the
shipping business. With many more ports to visit and often less efficient port
itineraries, they generate more business than the container volume suggests.
Although most trades are now containerized there remains a considerable amount
of break bulk cargo which cannot be handled in containers, so the liner services
are more varied. These trades are too extensive to review in detail, so we will
concentrate on one example, the Europe to West Africa service.
The Europe to West Africa trade operates between North West Europe and the
eighteen countries of West Africa, stretching from Senegal down to Angola. Nigeria is
comparatively rich, but many of the others are very poor with few ports and limited
supporting transport infrastructure. European trade accounts for two-thirds of the
seaborne traffic, with the remainder divided between the United States and Asia.29
The Europe to West Africa trade is a typical developed Third World trade with
the outward cargo leg dominated by manufactures and the return cargo dominated
by minor bulks. Southbound shipments include chemicals, cement, iron and steel,
machinery and various foodstuffs. The return cargo is principally composed of
primary products and semi-manufactures with a substantial trade in logs, coffee,
cocoa, oilseeds, vegetable oil, cotton and non-ferrous metals. The volume of cargo
southbound is almost twice the volume northbound, a fact that creates considerable
problems in terms of obtaining full utilization for the vessels.30
In 1995 there were eleven services offering regular sailings between North West
Europe and West Africa, with service intervals ranging from seven to twenty-one
days. Only about 60 per cent of
the cargo is containerized, the
remainder being a mix of break
bulk, wheeled and bulk cargo.
The fleet of forty ships engaged
in these services reflect the efforts
of the companies to respond to
the diversity of cargo. In January
1996 the fleet was as follows:

371
Only a quarter of the fleet is fully cellular, the remainder being more flexible
vessels which allow general cargo, wheeled cargo, containers and bulk to be carried
in the same ship.
These services do not have the regimented discipline of the deep sea container
services, varying the ships and services to meet the needs of the trade. For example
one service, shown in Figure 10.5, offers weekly container-ship sailings with less
frequent break bulk sailings. The ships load cargo in Europe at Felixstowe,
Rotterdam, Antwerp, Hamberg and Le Havre. In West Africa the line offers
shipment to virtually all major ports either direct or via a feeder system. A typical
itinerary might cover calling at Dakar, Freetown, Monrovia, Takoradi, Tema,
Lome, Port Harcourt, Douala, and Pointe Noire. To deal with the mix of containers,
break bulk and bulk cargo the service uses a fleet of six ships. Two container ships
of 1,600/1,800 TEU, three multi-purpose vessels of 600/700 TEU and a Conbulker
of 800 TEU. The multi-purpose ships have wide hatches and cargo handling gear
FIGURE 10.5 Typical liner route: UK-West Africa
THE LINER SHIPPING ROUTES

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
372
to enable containers to be worked on all hatches even in ports where no suitable
cargo handling gear is available.
The imbalance of containerized cargo leaves the shipping line with empty
containers to transport back to Europe, and strenuous efforts have been made to
containerize return cargoes in order to utilize the container space on ships. On the
West Africa to Europe leg the following commodities were containerized: coffee
(bagged in containers), empty gas cylinders (returned for refilling), high-value
veneers, ginger, cotton, mail. Attempts to containerize cocoa were initially
unsuccessful because the product ‘sweats’, while the large logs shipped from West
Africa are not generally suitable for containerization. About two-thirds of the
containers shipped out to West Africa thus travel back empty.
The marginal liner services
In discussing the liner trades it is easy to forget that cargo does not fall neatly into
general cargo and bulk. Between the obvious liner cargoes and the obvious bulks
are many ‘borderline’ trades which do not fit easily into either system. For example
in the mid-1980s Tasman Asia Shipping was set up to meet the transport requirements
of New Zealand’s forestry exports. It used six 22,000 dwt multi-purpose liners
with a capacity of 350 containers and 10,000 dwt of break bulk cargo, a speed of
16 knots and 25–35 ton cranes. The cargoes they carried include containers, reefer
containers, car parts, machinery, vehicles, steel products, pulp, paper, lumber,
cars, earth moving equipment and heavy lift cargoes up to 120 tonnes. Services
like this tend to be very fluid, constantly adjusting to the cargo flow. This is just
one of many small and highly specialized liner services which serve the borders of
the liner trades.
Intra-regional trades and feeder services
Finally there are the short sea trades. These have grown very rapidly as deep sea
operators have reduced their portcalls, preferring to distribute cargo from base
ports to outports. Many of the short sea trades use very small ships and voyages of
only three or four days.
10.10 The liner fleet
In the last section we reviewed the complex network of trades served by the liner
business. Now we turn to the fleet of ships used in these trades. Just as in other
sectors of the shipping market, the fleet is not an optimum. It is the result of 20 or
30 years of investment decisions. Although many of the vessels in this fleet are
now technically obsolete in some way or another, the fact that they are still trading
is evidence that they retain economic value.
The fleet of ships currently operating in the liner trades now consists of six
different types of ships shown in Figure 10.6:

373
•  Container ships: Cellular ‘lift on lift off container ships are now the biggest
and most modern part of the fleet. All the ships in this fleet have open holds
with cell guides and are designed exclusively for the carriage of containers.
•  Multi-purpose vessels: There is a fleet of about 22 m.dwt. These are ships
designed with a fast speed, good container capacity and the ability to carry
break bulk and other unitized cargo such as forest products. They were mainly
built during the early years of containerization when operators were handling
a mix of containerized and break bulk cargo. Most have open holds without
cell guides and often incorporating a ’tween deck.
•  ’Tweendeckers: These flexible ‘tramp’ vessels continued to be built until the
1980s and there is still a fleet of 13 m.dwt in operation. Two standard designs,
the SD14 and the Freedom were very popular. ’Tweendeckers have two decks,
narrow hatches, economical speed, limited container capacity and cargo gear.
•  General cargo liners: In the mid-1990s there were still a few of the purpose-
built cargo liners still in service (the Pointe Sans Souci, mentioned earlier in
this chapter, was scrapped in 1996). They are fast with multiple decks, extensive
cargo gear but poor container capacity.
•  Ro-ros: Multi-deck vessels in which the holds are accessed by ramps in the
bow, stern or side. Although sometimes similar in design to car ferries, they
have no accommodation or public areas and are designed primarily to carry
cargo on deep sea routes.
•  Barge carriers: A 1970s experiment which did not catch on. Carries 500 ton
standard barges which are floated or lifted on and off the ship.
The number of container ships increased from 750 in 1980 to 2,094 in 1997, and
they now dominate the liner fleet, accounting for 50 per cent of the total capacity
in dwt. This compares with a tanker fleet of 3,500 vessels and a bulk carrier fleet
FIGURE 10.6 Liner fleet by ship type
Source: Clarkson Research Studies
THE LINER FLEET

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
374
of 5,500 vessels, making container ships a very significant part of the merchant
fleet. The container-ship fleet is usually measured in TEU (Twenty foot Equivalent
Units, i.e. twenty foot containers). The ships have wide hatches designed to standard
container dimensions and cell guides in the holds and sometimes on deck. An
example of a 1,769 TEU container ship is shown in Figure 11.3 (page 401), along
with technical details. There is a positive correlation between size and speed. The
small feeder ships of 100–299 TEU have an average speed of 13.8 knots, while the
biggest ships over 4,000 TEU have an average speed of 24 knots. This reflects the
fact that smaller ships generally operate on short routes where high speed brings
fewer economic benefits.
FIGURE 10.7 Container ship fleet 1980–96
Source: Clarkson Research Studies
Containership size and economies of scale
Although economies of scale offer cheaper transport on many routes, draught
constraints or lack of cargo volume require the use of small ships on some routes.
Since the cargo base of the container business covers a spectrum of different sized
trades, this implies that liner operators require a range of different sizes of container
ships. As the container business has matured the fleet has evolved into segments,
each serving a different part of the market. Figure 10.6 sub-divides the fleet into
six segments.31 Three segments (Feeder, Feedermax and Handysize) are mainly
concerned with the short sea and draught restricted trades particularly on the North-
South routes while the larger vessels (sub-Panamax, Panamax, and post-Panamax)
serve the long haul deep sea business.

375
In both sectors of the fleet the trend has been towards bigger ships which offer
economies of scale. At the upper end the Panamax fleet (over 3,000 TEU and able
to transit Panama) has grown most rapidly in recent years, with a new generation
of post-Panamax vessels appearing in the 1990s. However, the fleet of smaller
vessels has also been growing, notably the fleet of ‘Handy’ container ships. These
medium sized vessels of 1–2,000 TEU are flexible enough for short sea operations,
large feeder services and North-South trading.
Not all containers travel in specialist container ships—the container is part of a
system that is independent of the vessel in which it is carried. Perhaps the most
challenging task is welding ad hoc container shipments into an integrated inter-
modal system, a process that by the mid-1990s had reached a very advanced stage
in the developed countries, and is progressing rapidly in most Third World countries.
10.11 Container ports and terminals
Port calls and liner pricing
Containerization changed the way the liner business managed its port itineraries.
Previously cargo liners operated a port-to-port service, ‘equalizing’ prices by
charging the same rate for all ports on their itinerary. Because shippers paid for the
journey to and from the port they had an incentive to use a liner service which
called at the local port. Each port had its own catchment area and to win a share of
this cargo, liner services had to include that port on their itinerary. This pricing
system encouraged lengthy itineraries and much duplication of port calls.
When containerization was introduced, the pricing system changed. Because
the liner companies now controlled the land transport they could plan and adopt
the itinerary which gave the cheapest overall unit transport cost. The result was to
channel trade through fewer ports, each major port having a greatly enlarged
catchment area. It also led to great competition between the ports to attract liner
services. Choosing a port itinerary involves a trade-off between the cost of the
call, against the revenue obtained from providing a direct service to and from the
port. Then there is the possibility of setting up intermediate distribution points to
serve a third area. For example, the Arabian Gulf might be served by a feeder
service from Jeddah in the Red Sea. In fact, we can define two levels of service:32
•  Load centres (base ports). These have a regular service with frequent loading
and discharge of cargoes. The shipper is guaranteed a regular service at a
fixed tariff, whether they are served direct or not. For example, Antwerp will
attract the same rate as Rotterdam, even if the ship does not call there.
•  Feeder ports (outports). Some ports are not included in the normal service
because they do not handle sufficient cargo to make this cost-effective.
However, in order to discharge their obligation to ‘meet the requirements of
the trade’, the company accepts cargo at outports and provides a feeder service
from a direct port. These cargoes will be charged extra.
CONTAINER PORTS AND TERMINALS

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
376
The port Infrastructure
Although there are currently about 400 ports which have a significant throughput
of containers, the top 60 handle 98 per cent of the throughput. Many countries
now have only one or two major container ports serving the deep sea trades,
supported by a range of smaller ports handling short sea and distribution trade.
Table 10.7 which lists the most important container ports in 1994, organized by
region. The two largest container ports, Hong Kong and Singapore, each handle
over 9 million TEU per annum, acting as regional distribution centres for the
predominantly maritime Asian distribution system.
Container terminals generally have several berths, each served by one or more
large cranes capable of lifting 40 tons. In an adjacent storage area the containers
are stored to await collection. To carry the weight of the container crane it is
generally necessary to strengthen the quay to take loads of 60–80 tons. Several
types of container terminal have been developed to meet differing requirements.
One system is to lift the container off the ship on to a trailer chassis, which is then
moved to a storage park to await collection. This has the advantage that the container
is handled only once and it interfaces efficiently with the road haulage system. Its
main drawback is that it uses a large amount of land and there is a significant
investment in trailers. Where land is at a premium, containers may be stacked up
to five high, using a system of gantry cranes which may also be used on the
quayside. However, the disadvantages of this system are the difficulty of obtaining
random access to containers in the stack and the cost of multiple handling of
individual units. The compromise is to stack containers two or three high, using
‘straddle carriers’, large fork-lift trucks or low loaders to move them from the
quayside to the stack and retrieve them when required. In small ports an area of
the quayside is often allocated for container storage.
In the advanced industrial areas of Europe, North America and the Far East,
containerization has channelled trade through a small number of ports that have
invested in high-productivity container terminals of the type outlined above. In
the developing countries, the problem is more complex, since the inland
infrastructure is often not sufficiently developed to handle a sophisticated container
network. As we saw in the example of the West Africa trade, cargo is not exclusively
containerized. In such cases, even small ports need to be equipped to handle
containers. This generally involves developing an existing berth for container
handling, undertaking any necessary strengthening of the quay, the purchase of a
suitable crane and straddle carriers or fork-lift trucks and the provision of a
container-packing service for break bulk cargo not delivered to the port in a
container. The containers are then stacked in a suitable location.
10.12 Liner companies, consortia and alliances
There are currently about 250 companies offering liner services of one sort or
another. A list of the largest companies is shown in Figure 10.8. These are very
different organizations from the bulk shipping companies. Most of the largest
ones have several thousand employees to handle the administration of freight cargo

377
scheduling and transport. Ownership in the liner
business is much more highly concentrated than
in bulk shipping. The ten biggest companies
control 11 per cent of the dry bulk fleet, 17 per
cent of the tanker fleet, but 35 per cent of the
container ship fleet.
This consolidation into larger companies is
a consequence of the very large amounts of
capital investment required to operate a unitized
general cargo transport system. Under the
commercial pressure to achieve greater
economies of scale through bigger ships and at
the same time provide more frequent services,
in the 1990s several of the major companies
formed alliances in which they pooled their
ships. The first of these, the Global Alliance
was formed by APL, OOCL, MOL, and
Nedlloyd in May 1994 with the intention of
launching an integrated Europe-Far East
service. The Alliance operators had a fleet of
187 container ships with 375,000 slots. This
was followed soon afterwards by the Grand
Alliance consisting of Hapag-Lloyd, NOL,
NYK, and P&OCL with 182 ships and 371,000
slots capacity. In 1995 a third alliance was
formed between the two largest liner companies,
Maersk and Sea-Land with a total of 206 ships.
A different solution to the capital intensity
problem faced by liner operators was removing
the ships from the balance sheet. This was
achieved by leasing the ships or chartering them
from independent operators. By the mid-1990s
about 40 per cent of the container ship capacity
was being serviced in this way.
Despite the benefits to the customer of
containerization, operating a liner service is
hardly more rewarding in the 1990s than it was
in the 1960s. In the 1960s British shipping
companies earned a return of 6 per cent on assets,
about half the industrial average at that time. By
the 1990s things had not improved very much.
The return on assets achieved by the major liner
companies who publish accounts show that in
the first half of the 1990s the average return
varied between 1 per cent and 8 per cent per
TABLE 10.7 World container port traffic
(1994)
Source: Containerisation International
LINER COMPANIES, CONSORTIA AND ALLIANCES

GENERAL CARGO: ECONOMICS OF LINER SHIPPING
378
annum. This compares with a long-term return on the US stock market of about 11
per cent.
10.13 Summary
As we have seen in this chapter, liner companies operate in a market which has all
the competitive edge of the bulk shipping market, but two substantial differences.
First, the commitment to run a regular service makes liner capacity inflexible.
FIGURE 10.8 Container ship fleets by capacity 1996
Source: Clarkson Research Studies

379
Second, with so many customers, price negotiation is more restricted. With these
restrictions the free market mechanism which regulates the bulk shipping market
takes on a very different character in the liner business. When we examine the
economic principles, we find that free market pricing would lead to a highly
volatile cashflow, but that a system of fixed prices is difficult to enforce. That, in
essence, has been the problem faced by the liner industry throughout its 125 year
history.
We examined the structure of liner costs and identified five ‘building blocks’,
which contribute to the economics of a liner service, the service schedule, the unit
slot cost, container operations, container costs and administrative costs. The choices
made by the liner company for each of these determines the cost profile of the
operation. On the revenue side the key principles are price stability and price
discrimination. The published rate book sets the framework for pricing which
involves differing degrees of discrimination by commodity and owner.
Our review of the demand for liner services concluded that the ‘commodity
analysis’ used to analyse the demand for bulk carriers is less appropriate as a
methodology for the liner trades. There are so many commodities and so few
statistics that detailed commodity analysis can hardly be expected to succeed. More
importantly, the demand for liner transport is not determined by regional imbalances
in supply and demand, but by the relative price and availability of goods. If a
manufacturer in England can source more cheaply from Taiwan than from Scotland,
he will choose Taiwan. In this sense the growth of demand depends on cost
differences within the world economy, while inter-company competition revolves
around a range of factors including price, speed, reliability and the quality of
service.
Liner services are constantly changing to meet the needs of the trade. The
major liner routes, known as the east-west trades, operate between the three industrial
centres of North America, Western Europe and Asia. These are supplemented by a
complex matrix of north-south trades serving the various developing countries. At
the margin are the small services designed to meet particular local needs.
The liner trade is carried by a fleet of ships comprising container ships, multi-
purpose vessels, ‘tweendeckers, traditional cargo liners and ro-ros. Some of these
vessels are designed to meet specific trading needs, while others are left over from
another shipping era, serving out their useful lives. The whole liner business is
supported by an extensive network of port facilities, ranging from the ‘super
terminals’ in Rotterdam, Hong Kong and Singapore to the many minor local ports
which serve the feeder trades.
The lessons from the liner business are simple enough. By using containers to
mechanize the transport of general cargo, it has, in Adam Smith’s words ‘opened
the whole world to a market for the produce of every sort of labour’. The financial
return to liner companies may not be spectacular, but their contribution to the
global trading economy is beyond question.
SUMMARY

