381
Chapter 11
The economics of ships
and ship designs
The market is as elastic as our vessel flexibility and cargo handling
systems allow it to be: it is not easy to build up a market based on the
ship. The name of the game is to build the ship around the market.
(Bengt Koch, Managing Director, Atlantic Container Line Services,
at RoRo 83 Conference, Gothenberg, 1983)
Chapter 11

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
382
11.1 What type of ship?
The derived demand for ships
So far we have said much about shipping economics, but little about the ships
themselves. The classification systems used by statistical organizations such as
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping recognize literally hundreds of ship types. This wealth
of different designs confronts shipowners with the difficult question ‘What type
of ship should I order?’. To help them in their decisions, they often ask shipping
economists questions like What will be the future demand for container ships?’.
The aim of this chapter is to discuss the different types of merchant ships and how
their design features fit into the economic model discussed in Chapter 4.
First we must be clear about the meaning of demand. Although ships occupy
the centre of the stage, the product in demand is not a ship, but transport. It is not
the containership that the customer wants, it is the transport of the container.
Shipowners can use whatever ships provide the transport most profitably.
Unfortunately this makes the shipping economist’s job much more difficult. If
containers could only be carried in container ships, all the shipping economist
would have to do is predict the trade in containers, and the demand for container
ships is determined. With several ship types available to carry containers, and
different sizes to choose from, the calculation of demand involves two additional
questions. First, ‘’What options are open to the shipowner?’ and, second, ‘What
economic criteria apply in choosing between them?’
The answer depends on the type of shipping venture for which the vessel is
intended. Although there are many different influences to consider, the most
important can be summarized under the three following headings:
1  Cargo type. The physical and commercial properties of the cargo to be
transported set a limit on the ship types that can potentially be employed in the
transport operation. In a limited number of cases, such as liquid natural gas or
nuclear waste, the cargo demands a specific type of ship, and the shipowner’s
choice is limited to general design and operating features such as speed, crew,
etc. For most cargoes, however, the shipowner can choose from several ship
types. Crude oil can be carried in a specialist tanker or a combined carrier; dry
bulk can be carried in a conventional bulk carrier, an open hold bulk carrier or
a combined carrier; containers in a containership, a ’tweendecker, a multi-
purpose vessel or a ro-ro.
2  Type of shipping operation. In the previous paragraph we assumed that the
shipowner knows the precise type of cargo to be carried, but in practice his
knowledge of both the cargo and other physical operating constraints will
depend upon the type of shipping operation for which the vessel is intended.
There are several different types of shipping operation. For example:
•  long-term charters where the shipowner knows precisely the cargoes to be
carried and the ports to be used;

383
•  spot charter market operations where the owner has only a general idea of
the type of cargo to be carried and no knowledge of the ports to be visited;
•  liner operations where the owner has a specific knowledge of the ports to
be visited and the likely cargo volume, but where both may change during
the operational life of the vessel.
   
The design criteria for a shipowner choosing a vessel for a long-term time
charter are likely to be quite different from those for the owner intending to
trade on the spot market. For example, the former will be preoccupied with
optimizing the ship to a specific operation, whereas the latter will be more
concerned with such factors as the vessel’s acceptability to charterers, and its
short-term resale value.
3  Commercial philosophy. The way in which the shipowner or shipping company
approaches the business may extend or limit the range of options. For example,
one shipping company may prefer vessels that are highly flexible, servicing a
number of different markets and thereby reducing the risk. This philosophy
might lead the shipowner to prefer a more expensive open hold bulk carrier,
which can carry both dry bulk cargo and containers. Another owner may
follow a policy of specialization, preferring a vessel that is in every respect
designed for the efficient carriage of a single cargo, offering greater efficiency
or lower costs but at the price of less flexibility.
It follows that shipping economists cannot forecast the demand for a particular
type of ship just by studying cargo movements. In the real world the choice of a
particular ship type depends on all three factors—cargo type, shipping operation
and commercial philosophy. This makes it difficult to predict which factors will
predominate in the final decision. Market research techniques of the type discussed
in chapter 14 will certainly form part of this process, as will fashion and market
sentiment.
Before leaving this discussion of demand, we must also define the term ship
type. Technical classifications start from the physical characteristics of the ship.
Tankers and bulk carriers are obviously different ship types because they have
different hull designs. However, as economists, we must take a broader view.
Ships belong to the same ship type if, from the shipowner’s point of view, they are
substitutes. From this perspective size plays as great a part in determining a ship’s
type as its general design features. A shipowner who buys a 280,000 dwt tanker
ends up trading in completely different markets from the owner who buys a 30,000
dwt tanker. They are different ship types and we must recognize this in our analysis.
Sometimes there are physical limitations which draw a clear line between groups
of ships, for example the Suez Canal, the Panama Canal or the St Lawrence Seaway.
More often one size group merges into another. The fact that ship size groups
overlap simply emphasizes the point we have already made that ship demand is not
about ships, it is about transport.
Finally the detailed design features must also be considered. Cargo handling
gear is an important issue on many ships. In tankers the pumping capacity and the
segregation of individual cargo tanks must be considered. In bulk carriers and
WHAT TYPE OF SHIP

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
384
container ships the key issue is the provision of cargo handling gear, usually cranes.
Coatings are another small but important item The coating of the tanks and ballast
spaces is a particular issue in tankers. Bow thrusters to assist docking; the standard
of accommodation; fuel saving equipment; and many other minor items contribute
to the long-term efficiency of the ship. In financial terms these items may add
significantly to the cost. It is not unusual for a well-specified tanker or bulk carrier
to cost 5–10 per cent more than the ‘basic’ design offered by the shipyard. This
higher initial cost is not always reflected in the resale price, so an owner ordering
a ship speculatively may have a very different approach from an owner building
for his own long-term business.
Comparing the options—art or science?
When the range of suitable designs has been narrowed down, the preferred design
is identified by carrying out a projected cashflow analysis of the type discussed in
chapter 5, reduced to a form that allows the economic performance of different
ship types to be compared.1 We shall discuss these techniques later in the chapter,
but at the outset it is necessary to draw attention to the difficulty of quantifying
some of the important variables in economic terms. Although some ships are ordered
for specific projects where the precise operating conditions are known in advance,
often the future revenue, cargo or voyage pattern is not known except in a very
general way. In these cases the main consideration will be ensuring that the ship is
‘marketable’, in the sense of being acceptable to charterers and second-hand buyers.
Where these factors cannot be specified with precision, there is less scope for
‘fine tuning’ either the design or the economic analysis. In short, the process of
identifying the future demand for ship types cannot be reduced to purely economic
criteria. Benford develops this point in the following way:
Whether we use computers, hand held calculators, or backs of envelopes one
rule applies: the decision will be made by some person, or group of persons,
and will not hinge simply on the best numerical projection of some measure of
merit. Like nearly all else in our business, there is art as well as science in this.
Indeed—and roughly speaking—the more important the decision the greater is
the reliance upon art. That is what makes ship design so fascinating.2
Faced with an uncertain future and several finely balanced options, it is possible
that the shipowner may take his lead from the marketplace—when 45,000 dwt
products tankers are in fashion he will order them, or when Panamax bulk carriers
are in fashion he may order these in preference to the ‘handy-size’. Ship ordering
statistics suggest that this is the case. The ‘acid test’ comes during depressions
when a shipowner’s survival depends upon maintaining a stronger cashflow than
his competitors, and for companies in the liner or specialized bulk market this
cannot easily be assessed on a ship-by-ship basis. Ideally each ship should be seen
as part of the company’s investment portfolio and the cashflow tested on a company
basis, an issue we shall return to later in the chapter.

385
In the remainder of this chapter we first discuss in greater detail the influences
that cargo type, shipping operations and commercial philosophy have on ship
design. We then discuss, with examples, the various ship types used in each operating
sector. Finally, we take a brief took at the economic evaluation of ship designs.
11.2 Cargo type and ship design
It was suggested in the previous section that the type of cargo to be carried does
not generally restrict the shipowner to a specific type of vessel. There are, however,
aspects of the ship design that can be optimized to give the best possible result for
a particular cargo type. These include cargo deadweightt, tank and hold dimensions,
cargo space access, speed and cargo handling gear.
These are all features of the ship design on which the naval architect needs clear
guidance, and the more clearly the future cargo operations are defined the greater
scope there is for developing a design that caters specifically for the requirements
of that particular cargo. Three aspects of cargo are of particular significance in
relation to ship design—the cargo value, its stowage factor and the cargo units in
which it is shipped.
Cargo value
The value of the cargo is important because it influences the financial cost of
transit time and hence the design speed of the ship. High-value cargoes incur a
substantial inventory cost, so there is a financial incentive to transport and store
small quantities. There is also a cost attached to time in transit. At an interest rate
of 10 per cent per annum, a 10,000-ton cargo worth $4,000 per ton would incur
implicit interest charges of $1 million on a three-month journey. In addition, it is
in the high-value commodities that air freight becomes a significant competitor
with sea transport and, although the tonnages are small, the competition is significant
because it is concerned with premium cargo. Clearly, a fast transit time is important
for high-value goods and, for this reason, vessels built to carry high-value cargoes
generally justify a faster speed. The range of values of seaborne cargoes is extremely
wide, as Table 11.1 shows.
At the lower end of the range, some bulk commodities such as iron ore and
coal have very low values. These are commodities that are generally shipped in
very large consignments (up to 300,000 tons) and, since they have a low inventory
cost, the emphasis is upon minimizing the unit transportation cost. For such
cargoes, ship designers will generally work out the optimum operating speed for
the vessel, taking account of the anticipated level of operating costs, bunker
costs and the amount of cargo required to be delivered in a year. An important
exception to this rule arises where the vessel is to be traded on the spot charter
market. In these circumstances, even though the shipowner may expect to carry
iron ore, he may specify a higher design speed so that he will be able to complete
more voyages during periods of high freight rates when he is making premium
profits.
CARGO TYPE AND SHIP DESIGN

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
386
The stowage factor
The cargo stowage factor tells the ship designer how many cubic metres of hold
space will be occupied by a ton of any given kind of cargo. It determines how
much cargo can be fitted into the ship or, conversely, how much hold volume must
be provided if the ship is to accommodate its full deadweight. The density of
cargoes varies widely as shown by the figures in Table 11.2. Since the stowage
factor relates to the space actually taken up by the cargo in the ship, this obviously
depends on how well the ship is designed to accommodate the cargo. For example,
it is possible to fit much more packaged timber into a purpose-built bulk carrier
than into a general purpose bulk carrier with self trimming holds.
TABLE 11.1 Value per ton of OECD imports by commodity
  Source: OECD, Series C Trade Statistics by Commodity, 1969
TABLE 11.2 Stowage factor for various commodity trades
  Source: Deakin and Seward (1973)
Given such a wide range of stowage factors, the ship designer must have some
idea what cargoes are to be carried before he can determine the internal cubic
capacity of the vessel. For example, if the ship is to be used to carry only iron ore,

387
it can be designed with cargo spaces that will accommodate a dense commodity
stowing at 0.5 cubic metres per ton, whereas if it is to be used for commodities
such as coal or grain an internal cubic capacity of about 1.4 cubic metres per ton is
required, and this is the capacity of the average general-purpose bulk carrier.
For ships carrying a mix of cargoes the problem is more complex since the ship
designer will be concerned with the average of high- and low-density commodities.
On average, containers stow at around 3 cubic metres per ton and, in order to
utilize the full ship deadweight, containers are generally stacked on deck. However,
this depends on what the containers are carrying, which may change. We saw in
chapter 10 that the average container payload per TEU is about 9 tons, but that
varies considerably from trade to trade. Where commodities with stowage factors
that depart significantly from the average are shipped in large quantities, it is often
economic to build specialist ships to carry them. Ore carriers, woodchip carriers
and car carriers are three prominent examples, the first to deal with a high-density
cargo and the latter two to deal efficiently with low density cargoes.
Cargo units
Cargo units are important because they present the ship designer with the challenge
of designing a ship that can handle and stow a particular type of cargo efficiently.
This is not just a matter of identifying the type of commodity being shipped,
because the same commodity can be transported in many different ways. For
example, china clay can be loaded into bags and the bags can be transported loose,
on a pallet, or in a container. Alternatively, the china clay could be shipped loose
in the hold of a bulk carrier or mixed with water to form a slurry and shipped in a
special tanker. In practice we can classify these different forms of shipping
commodities in terms of ‘cargo units’. Ten of the cargo units that occur most
commonly are summarized in Table 11.3.
The first five items on the list are ‘natural’ cargo units, that is, the cargo is
shipped in its natural form without specialist treatment. General cargo units are
loose items such as bags or boxes, without any special packing. This type of cargo
is the most difficult and expensive to transport by sea. Packing it into the hold of
a ship is time-consuming, requires skill, and there are associated problems of loss
and damage in transit as was explained in chapter 10.
A bulk cargo unit consists of a ship or hold-size parcel of homogeneous cargo—
for example, 100,000 tons of iron ore, 50,000 tons of coal, 12,000 tons of sugar or
200,000 tons of crude oil. Homogeneous bulk cargoes can be loaded and unloaded
using grabs, suction or pumps as appropriate, and the aim is generally to design a
ship that can load a full cargo deadweight of a single commodity. In practice, the
hold is the smallest size unit for dry bulk cargo and the cargo tank the smallest unit
for liquid bulk. Unit bulk cargoes consist of shipsized parcels made up of units
each of which must be handled individually—for example, steel products, forest
products or bales of wool. In such cases it may be possible to design ‘tailored’
vessels offering improved stowage or faster cargo handling. Finally, the other
natural cargo units are heavy and awkward cargoes and wheeled cargoes. Heavy
and awkward cargoes are worth singling out because they present special shipping
CARGO TYPE AND SHIP DESIGN

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
388
problems in terms of handling and stowing the cargo. For example, the tunnel kiln
for a cement plant or a harbour ferry being shipped from Europe to the Far East
both present stowage problems.
Turning to the ‘artificial’ units in Table 11.3 (that is, cargo specially packed for
transport), we are concerned with packing cargo into easily handled units. The
technique of ‘unitization’ has two dimensions. The first is to pack the cargo in
such a way that it can be handled mechanically rather than requiring skilled manual
handling and stowage. The second is to establish standardization between different
transport modes of rail, road and sea so that an integrated ‘door-to-door’ transport
service can be provided for unitized cargo. In practice, there are five main forms
of artificial cargo units: pre-slung or banded; pallets; flats; containers; and barges.
TABLE 11.3 Cargo units in which commodities are shipped by sea

389
The use of standard 20 ft and 40 ft containers gives the shipowner carrying
general cargo a homogeneity similar to that of unit bulk cargo. This allows
mechanized loading and discharging systems to be fully used, with a ship designed
to make the handling system operate efficiently. The uncompromising size, shape
and weight of the container require square cargo holds and wide hatches. Initially,
liner companies built fleets of specialist container vessels, though it rapidly became
apparent that container capacity was an important aspect of the design of conventional
multi-purpose vessels or even bulk carriers.
The use of pallets and flats provides a degree of unitization without requiring
the high capital costs incurred by containers and trailers, and there are fewer
problems in returning the empty units. Pallets have not become established as a
base unit for a sea transport system in the same way as containers except on individual
routes where they meet a special need, particularly in the multi-purpose liner
trades for those goods that are not containerized. The cargo is loaded on to a
pallet, of which there are a variety of sizes, and secured with bands or a plastic
cover shrunk to protect the cargo. Loading and discharge are still labour-intensive
operations and rely on the skill of stevedores to pack the pallets into the ship
efficiently. It is, however, dramatically more efficient than the handling of individual
drums, sacks or bales. Standard barges were introduced in an attempt to cater for
the small bulk packages of medium-value cargoes, especially where an inland
waterway system allows through water transport to inland destinations. The barge
system has not been adopted on any significant scale to date.
There are many ways in which a ship design can be developed to improve its
efficiency in handling and stowing unitized cargo, provided the dimensions of the
units are known in advance. Some of the most important are:
•  Hold dimensions. Ships carrying containers, packaged timber or any standard
unit can be designed with holds that precisely match the external dimensions
of the units they are to carry. For example ‘pallet friendly’ reefer vessels are
designed with decks tailored to accommodate the maximum payload of standard
pallets.
•  Cell guides. To speed up handling on container ships, cell guides are fitted in
the holds and occasionally on deck so that containers do not need to be secured.
•  Hatch design. Bulk carriers for the transportation of packaged lumber may be
designed with hatch coamings that match the standard lumber package size,
thus facilitating the efficient stacking of packages on deck. Wide (sometimes
called ‘open’) hatches provide vertical access to all parts of the hold.
•  Cargo access ramps. Ramps may be fitted to allow cargo to be loaded by fork-
lift truck, or to be driven aboard on its own wheels. They may be located at
the bow, the stern or in the side of the vessel.
•  Cargo handling gear. Gantry cranes, heavy lift derricks, or other cargo handling
gear may be fitted to speed up the loading and discharge of standard units.
•  Hoistable decks. These may be fitted to allow the head-room to be adjusted
for different cargoes.
•  Tank segregations. For liquid cargoes the provision of ‘self contained’ tanks
capable of handling many different liquid parcels within a single ship increases
CARGO TYPE AND SHIP DESIGN

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
390
flexibility. This generally involves the installation of separate pumping systems
for each tank and often special coatings such as zinc or stainless steel to allow
difficult chemicals to be carried.
This is not an exhaustive list, but it illustrates the way in which ships may be
adapted to the carriage of unit cargoes.
11.3 Fitting the ship to the shipping operation
The next step is to examine the ships themselves and see how this works out in
practice. In Figure 11.1, the main cargo-carrying ship types currently in use in the
world merchant fleet are shown. This is not an exhaustive analysis but it shows the
main categories of ship type and is the framework we will use in the remainder of
this chapter. In terms of market segments, these ships can be broadly divided into
liner fleet, the bulk carrier fleet, the tanker fleet, combined carriers and the fleet
of ships designed for a single cargo.
FIGURE 11.1 The merchant cargo fleet by ship type
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
At least five different ship types are used in the liner market, their principal
design features being the ability to group many small cargo units within a single
vessel and usually a relatively high speed, reflecting the value of the cargo carried.
Containerships now form the greater part of the fleet in terms of cargo capacity,
but ro-ros, and a variety of more or less sophisticated multi-purpose vessels continue
to be used. There is also a great deal of variety in the design of ships used in the
bulk trades, the main ones being tankers, bulk carriers, ore carriers, combined

391
carriers, gas tankers, chemical tankers and forest products carriers. The shipping
operation can affect ship design in several different ways. This can best be illustrated
by some examples:
•  Example 1. A steel plant purchasing an iron ore carrier to service a long-term
iron ore supply contract between Brazil and Japan. In this case, the cargo, the
cargo volume and the trade route are all known in advance, so the ship can be
designed to optimize the shipping operation in terms of the cargo to be carried,
the ports to be utilized and the opportunities for exploiting economies of
scale. In addition, since the vessel is to be operated over a number of years,
the shipowner is likely to take a close interest in any technology that will
reduce operating costs—for example, automation and fuel-saving equipment.
•  Example 2. A dry bulk carrier operator purchasing a bulk carrier to trade on
the voyage charter market. In this case, the shipowner has only a general idea
of the cargoes and ports that the vessel will be required to service. Depending
upon his style of operation, he may choose a small ship that can access many
ports, or a larger ship that will be more competitive in some of the major bulk
commodity trades. In particular, he will be concerned to ensure that the ship
will be attractive to charterers and that it will have a good resale value even
after a short time. For this reason, a well-established standard design may be
of interest.
•  Example 3. A bulk operator offering shipping services in specialist bulk markets
such as motor vehicles or forest products. In this case, the shipowner may not
have a precisely defined future operating pattern, but he will have a clear idea
of the special cargo features that he wishes to build in to the vessel in order to
reduce his operating costs and improve the service offered to the shipper. This
may involve the design of a specialist ship such as a vehicle carrier, or a
sophisticated version of a standard ship such as a forest products carrier. In
such cases, the cargo figures prominently in the ship design, as do the range of
ports, terminals and cargo handling facilities servicing this particular trade.
There are no hard and fast rules. Ultimately the merchant ship has to fit into the
business and, as the preceding examples show, different shipowners have different
requirements.
Cargo flexibility and the LCM rating
Inevitably the process of ship design involves compromise, particularly over the
range of different cargoes that the vessel can carry. A shipowner who invests in
specialist tonnage automatically shuts himself out from markets that could be
serviced by more flexible vessels, or at least he is likely to incur a cost penalty. As
a result, the question of operational flexibility is a central issue in ship design.
Looked at from the owner’s viewpoint, the ship is a capital asset that will carry
whatever cargo yields the greatest profit; obviously, the more different types of
cargo it can carry and the more efficiently it can carry them, the more attractive
FITTING THE SHIP TO THE SHIPPING OPERATION

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
392
the ship is in commercial terms. However, the process of designing a ship is
complicated by a series of complex trade-offs between the cargo performance of
the ship, its seagoing performance and its commercial performance. Buxton describes
the problem in the following way:
Merchant ships are mobile warehouses whose many different forms have evolved
as a result of attempts to balance on the one hand the need for suitable storage
capacity, against on the other hand the need for mobility. Thus a ship constructed
as a simple rectangular box of appropriate dimensions could provide an ideal
space for storing containers, but would be difficult to propel through the water,
while an easily driven hull would offer relatively little useable cargo space.
Ship design is largely a matter of solving such conflicts to produce vessels
which are suited to the services in which they will employed.3
A rough idea of the degree of cargo unit flexibility of different ship types is
illustrated by Figure 11.2, which lists on the left-hand side the various cargo units
we have discussed and on the right-hand side a range of recognized ship types. A
line links each cargo unit to the various ships that are capable of transporting it,
and for each ship type the lateral cargo mobility (LCM) coefficient records the
number of different cargo units that the vessel can carry.
Four ships are sufficiently specialized to have an LCM rating of 1—the container
ship, the vehicle carrier, the bulk carrier and the tanker. All these vessels are
restricted to a single type of cargo unit. The combined carrier has an LCM rating
of 2, reflecting its ability to switch between dry bulk and crude oil, while the open
hatch bulk carrier can transport containers, pallets and pre-slung cargo in addition
to dry bulk parcels. The ro-ro is even more flexible, with the ability to carry
almost any cargo except bulk and barges, giving it an LCM rating of 6. However,
the most flexible of all is the multi-purpose cargo liner, which can carry everything
except liquid bulk parcels and barges.
This analysis reveals a surprising trend. Common sense seems to suggest that
the more flexible the ship, the more successful it will be. After all, flexibility
reduces risk and increases revenue earning opportunities. However, when we look
at the ship types which are most in demand, the trend is decisively in favour of
specialization. In the 30 years 1966 to 1996 the fastest growing sectors of the fleet
were tankers, bulk carriers, container ships and vehicle carriers, all of which have
an LCM ratio of 1. In contrast the fleets of highly flexible ship types such as cargo
liners, ro-ros, barge carriers and combined carriers have been noticeably in retreat.
This suggests that in the modern shipping industry the economic benefits of
specialization outweigh the economic benefits from flexibility. A useful reminder
that ultimately the KISS (Keep it Simple, Stupid) principle is the best guide to
ship design. Sophisticated ships make interesting conference papers, but in the
harsh commercial world simple vessels, which do one job well, do best.

393
11.4 Ships for the liner trades
In no sector of the shipping industry have ship designs changed so fundamentally
as the liner business. As we saw in Chapter 10, in the 1960s the liner companies
changed strategy, substituting specialized container ships for flexible cargo liners.
Like the switch from sail to steel, the transition has taken many years and a large
number of vessels left over from the cargo liner era continue to be used and in
FIGURE 11.2 Analysis of flexibility
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
Note: Lateral cargo mobility (LCM) rating reflects the number of different types of cargo units that
the vessel can carry, i.e. its flexibility. The higher the number, the greater the flexibility.
SHIPS FOR THE LINER TRADES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
394
some cases are being replaced. Under this heading we consider five ship types, the
containership, the ro-ro, the multi-purpose liner, the Barge Carrying Vessels (BCVs),
and ‘tweendeck tramps.
Container ships
All the major liner trades use container ships. A container ship is, in principle, an
open box in which containers can be stacked. It has hatches the width of the holds,
which are fitted with cell guides, allowing containers to be dropped into place and
held securely during the voyage. The hatches are sealed with strengthened hatch
covers which provide the base for stacking more containers above deck. Since
these have no supporting structure they must be clamped in place. Some companies
have experimented with hatchless designs which avoid the labour intensive
procedure of clamping containers.
Details of two container ships are shown in Figure 11.3, one a small vessel
intended for the feeder trades and the other a large vessel for use in deep sea
services. Since the sole purpose of these ships is to carry containers, their design
centres on container dimensions. ISO standards identify a range of containers, the
most widely used sizes being the 20 ft and 40 ft containers, with dimensions as
shown in Table 11.4. Container ships are generally designed around the 8 ft 6 ins
high module, though this also allows a mix of 8 ft and 9 ft 6 ins containers to be
stowed as well. The ISO also specifies a weight standard, which is a maximum of
24 tons for 20 ft containers and 30 tons for 40 ft containers. These are well above
the average values likely to be found in practice, which may range between 10 and
15 tons depending on the trade and the type of cargo.
Table 11.4 Principal dimensions of flat roof steel containers
  Source: UNCTAD (1985), p. 141
To begin with containership designs were categorized into ‘generations’,
reflecting the evolving technology. As the fleet has matured and grown in size to
more than 2,000 ships it has polarized into several different size categories shown
by the fleet statistics in Table 11.5. Each sector has a different place in the market.
Smaller container ships of less than 1,000 TEU, often referred to as ‘Feeder’ (0–
499 TEU) and ‘Feedermax’ (500–999 TEU) vessels are generally used on short

395
haul operations. They distribute the containers brought to regional load centres by
the deep sea services and carry coastal traffic. The larger vessels, over 2,000 TEU,
are used on long haul trades where they spend up to 80 per cent of their time at sea.
There are three groups of these vessels, referred to as Sub-Panamax (2–3,000
TEU), Panamax (3–4,000 TEU) and post-Panamax (over 4,000 TEU). Between
the large and the small container ships is a sizeable fleet of Handy vessels which
are small enough to be used intra-regionally, but large enough to be used in the
North-South trades where port restrictions or cargo volume do not permit the use
of a larger vessel. Since the different fleet segments, which are listed in Figure
11.3, have different functions they also have different design characteristics,
especially speed and cargo handling facilities.
FIGURE 11.3 Container ship
SHIPS FOR THE LINER TRADES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
396
Speed is a central feature of containership design. During the last 20 years a
pattern has emerged in which larger vessels have higher speeds. This relationship
is illustrated in Table 11.5. In 1995 the average Feeder vessel had a speed of 13.8
knots, compared with an average speed of 24 knots for the average post-Panamax
vessel. With each step up in size the speed increases. The economic explanation of
this trend is the correlation between the size of vessel and the length of haul. High
speeds bring a cost penalty in terms of fuel consumption and restricted hull design,
since high speeds require a fine hull form. For short haul trades where there are
many port calls speed is less important than economy and cargo payload. Conversely
on long hauls speed is highly productive, reducing journey times and the number
of ships required to run a service. Whatever the economic justification, and it is
complex, the relationship between speed and size in container ships is very clear.
Cargo handling gear also varies with size, following a similar pattern to the
bulk carrier fleet. Many of the smaller vessels carry cargo gear and the larger
container ships rely exclusively on shore based cargo handling facilities. In 1996,
30 per cent of the feeder vessels, 49 per cent of the Feedermaxes and 39 per cent
of the Handy container ships had cargo gear but only ten container ships over
2,000 TEU had their own cargo handling gear.
One of the most important ways of increasing containership versatility was the
development of refrigerated containers, enabling the container companies to compete
with reefer operators for the trade in meat, dairy products and fruit. This is achieved
by insulating the containers and, where a substantial volume of reefer cargo is
available (for example, on the Australia to UK route), incorporating a central
refrigeration plant into the ship. This blows cold air through ducts into the insulated
containers. At the loading and discharging ports the insulated containers are stored
in special refrigerated reception facilities or, where none is available, a portable
refrigeration plant is used. For small trades, containers incorporating their own
refrigeration plant are used, obtaining their power from an electrical socket adjacent
to the container slot. In addition to fast cargo handling, refrigerated containers
TABLE 11.5 The container ship fleet, by size and hull characteristics
  Source: Container ship Register 1996, Clarkson Research Studies

397
offer shippers the benefit of precise temperature control through the whole journey
and a better-quality product, which in the case of fruit and vegetables may result
in a higher selling price.4
Finally, there has also been much research into developing containers suitable
for the transport of small bulk cargoes. These include the use of ventilated containers
for agricultural commodities such as coffee and cocoa beans, tank containers for
bulk liquids, and containers with special loading and discharging facilities for the
fast automated handling of minor bulk commodities. As we saw in chapter 10,
bulk cargoes such as wool, rubber, latex, cotton and forest products are now
containerized.
Ro-ro ships
In some cases, it is not feasible to containerize cargo. This confronted the shipping
industry with the problem of finding a more efficient way of handling a mix of small
bulk and heavy and awkward cargoes, which had moved in the traditional cargo
liners but which could not be containerized. To combine fast cargo handling with
greater cargo flexibility, in the late 1960s ‘roll on, roll off’ vessels were introduced
into the deep sea trades. Several different designs were developed, but in concept the
ro-ro is a cargo liner with through decks and roll-on access by means of ramps, rather
than via hatches in the weatherdeck. This configuration is particularly suitable for
carrying any cargo that can easily be handled by a fork-lift truck (pallets, bales,
containers, packaged timber, etc.) and also for wheeled cargo (cars, loaded trucks or
trailers, tractors, etc.). A major advantage of the ro-ro vessel is its ability to provide
fast port turnaround without special cargo handling facilities.
Like many other shipping innovations, the roll on, roll off concept was first
developed in the US domestic trade—in 1928 Seatrain introduced a service between
Havana, East Coast ports and Gulf Coast ports carrying freight cars and vehicles.
However, for many years the ro-ro was viewed as uneconomic in deep sea trades
owing to the low utilization of cubic capacity. It was not until the late 1960s that
the potential for using this type of vessel in the deep sea trades was fully appreciated
and the first deep sea ro-ro service was introduced in 1969 by Scan Austral. The
company had been operating a service between Europe and Australia using open-
type liner ships of the Scandia class. Escalating cargo handling costs and slow port
turnaround in Australia forced them to consider unitization, but a detailed cargo
analysis revealed that only a small proportion of the trade could be containerized
at that time. In volume terms, the southbound trade was dominated by forest
products, cars and bulk liquids; while wool, hides, canned goods, fresh fruit and
refined metals dominated the northbound passage. Overall, they found that only
40 per cent of the volume of cargo could be economically containerized. The
choice of ro-ros followed logically, since containerized cargo could be carried but
the mini-bulks could be handled in the most convenient form from pallets through
to heavy lift units of 90 tons.
Although ro-ros have never been adopted on the scale of cellular container
ships, they are still used in some trades. In 1984, Atlantic Container Lines (ACL)
put five 34,000 dwt ro-ros into service. The ships were designed to be capable of
SHIPS FOR THE LINER TRADES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
398
carrying a cargo mix that includes containers, forest products, long steel items and
every type of wheeled vehicle. There are container holds at the front of the ships
and three ro-ro decks at the rear, accessed by a quarter stern ramp. Two of these
decks have hoistable car decks, which can be adjusted to improve cargo stowage.
On the weatherdeck there are permanent cell guides. This arrangement allows a
high utilization to be obtained for vehicles or block stowage of unit cargo, combined
with fast cargo handling for containers.
Although ro-ros have highly flexible cargo capacity, with an LCM coefficient
of 6, and can handle cargo efficiently even in ports with very basic facilities, this
flexibility has a price. Ro-ros have a lower stowage productivity than container
ships and, since the cargo is more difficult and labour intensive to secure, the
loading times are generally slower. In addition, ro-ros are very management
intensive, requiring careful stowage planning.5 However their greatest disadvantage
is that they lack the simple integration with other transport systems which is the
chief asset of the containership fleet. As a result the ro-ro fleet is very much
smaller than the container fleet, and even on routes such as the West Africa trade
where suitable conditions exist, ro-ros account for only about 10 per cent of the
tonnage employed.6
Multi-purpose cargo liners
The traditional ship used in the liner services was the multi-deck cargo liner, of
which a typical example is the Ocean Priam liner built in the early 1960s. These
vessels had ‘tween decks for mixed general cargo, tanks for carrying liquid parcels,
and refrigerated capacity. They could also carry small bulk parcels (e.g. minor
amounts of ore, copra, steel) in the lower hold and often had cargo handling gear
with heavy lift ability. This type of ship is very effective in dealing with a wide
range of cargo types, since general cargo, small bulk parcels, refrigerated cargo
and small liquid parcels can all be accommodated within a single vessel. The
major drawback is the time and labour required to load and discharge cargo. There
are still a few of these vessels in operation, but there was no significant newbuilding
beyond the 1970s.
Where there is a continuing demand for flexible liner tonnage, traditional cargo
liners have mainly been replaced by ‘multi-purpose’ or lo-lo (lift on, lift off)
vessels. Ships of this type are generally 15,000–22,000 dwt with four or five
holds, each containing a ’tween deck. The main difference from earlier traditional
liners is that they are designed to carry a full load of containers as well as general
cargo. This is achieved by designing the lower hold and the ’tween deck with
dimensions compatible with containers.
The details of two typical multi-purpose vessels are shown in Figure 11.4. The
multi-purpose shown at the top of the figure is one of the simpler designs. It has
dimensions selected to allow containers to be stacked in the holds and up to four
high on the hatch covers. The emphasis on containers is also reflected in the length
of holds, which are also designed to accommodate containers of 20 ft or 40 ft in
length. In order to allow containers to be moved easily in or out, the hatches are
much wider than in a traditional cargo liner or ’tweendeck tramp, stretching the

399
FIGURE 11.4 Multi-purpose vessels
SHIPS FOR THE LINER TRADES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
400
full width of the ship. As a rule there would be cargo handling gear, typically
cranes, though heavy lift derricks are frequently fitted.
In economic terms, the multi-purpose vessel is a compromise for use in trades
that are partly containerized. We saw an example of this in the case study of the
West Africa trade in Chapter 10. The vessels are less efficient at handling containers
than pure container ships, since they do not have cell guides, but the open holds
and ‘tween decks allow them to carry general cargo, containers or bulk cargoes
such as forest products. This is still essential on some trade routes where
containerized cargo is very unbalanced, particularly those in the Third World. In
their simplest form they have a lateral cargo mobility rating of 5, with the ability
to carry preslung cargo, palletized cargo, flats, containers, heavy and awkward
cargo, and wheeled vehicles.
From the liner operator’s point of view, the major problem with the multi-
purpose ship is that, although it is capable of handling a wide range of different
cargoes, it is not operationally efficient in any of these. For this reason, some
owners choose to order more sophisticated vessels specially designed for fast cargo
handling and more efficient cargo stowage. An example of this type of ship,
illustrated in the lower half of Figure 11.4, is the series of ‘combination carriers’
built by Leif Hoegh in the early 1980s for use in their Middle East—Pacific
service where the trade flow involved a mix of unitized, wheeled and minor bulk
cargo. The ships are 42,000 dwt. with wide hatches giving a container capacity of
1,660 TEU and three holds (Nos 1, 2 and 7) with ’tween decks for break bulk
cargo. Cargo handling gear includes four jib cranes and a 41-ton gantry crane
making the vessel capable of loading heavy bulk cargo, grain, long timber and
cars in 400 square metres of special garage space. The holds have hydraulic container
supports rather than cell guides to speed up container handling, but they leave the
holds clear when carrying bulk cargo. The hatch covers are hydraulic and the ships
have a design speed of 16.0 knots.7
Barge carrying vessels (BCVS)
The 1960s was a decade of great innovation in the liner trades. Another design that
was developed to extend the benefits of unitization to the mini-bulk cargoes
previously carried as bottom cargo was the barge carrier. Barge-carrying systems
are based on the concept of grouping a number of ‘floating holds’ (i.e. barges)
within a single ship. The barges are generally 400–1,000 tons and can be filled
with general cargo or small bulk parcels, making barge systems at least as flexible
as a traditional cargo liner in terms of range of cargoes carried. The main problem
is getting the barge into the barge carrier—the LASH system uses a shipboard
crane, and the Baccat system uses a float-on system. So far the barge carrier has
not been widely adopted in the West, but is used in Russia.
The ’tweendeck tramp
Finally, before moving on to a review of liner vessels, we come to the ‘tweendecker
tramp. These vessels are typically of 10,000–22,000 dwt and are designed with a

401
’tween deck that enables them to carry either a full load of general cargo or bulk
cargoes such as grain. In some modern designs the ‘tween deck is operated by
hydraulics. Until the 1950s, ’tweendeckers dominated the dry bulk market and
many were employed carrying general cargo from Western Europe to the developing
countries and bulk cargo on the return journey—one of the classics was general
cargo from the UK to South America, with a return cargo of grain from the River
Plate. This flexibility was highly efficient at a time when the size of vessel used in
the bulk trades was broadly similar to that used in the liner trades, enabling the
owner to move freely between the two market sectors. Since the mid-1950s, the
rapid growth of parcel size in the bulk trades has resulted in the ’tweendecker
being squeezed out by the general-purpose bulk carrier, which has no ’tween deck.
11.5 Ships for the dry bulk trades
In the bulk cargo market, the focus is on low cost transport. The bulk carrier fleet
(Table 11.6) consists of 5,014 vessels of 230 m.dwt. The fleet falls into four main
parts generally referred to as Handy bulk carriers (10–29,999 dwt), Handymax
bulk carriers (30–49,999 dwt), Panamax (50–79,999 dwt) and Capesize (over
80,000 dwt). These ships carry a wide spectrum of bulk cargoes ranging from
grain, phosphate rock, iron ore and coal, to toxic chemicals, with a premium on
economy and flexibility.
TABLE 11.6 Bulk carrier fleet, January 1996 by size and hull characteristics
Source: Bulk Carrier Register 1996, Clarkson Research Studies
SHIPS FOR THE DRY BULK TRADES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
402
The bulk carrier
Nowadays the major bulk cargoes and the great majority of minor bulk cargoes
are transported in bulk carriers of the type shown in Figure 11.5, which provides
examples of three different designs, a small 35,000 dwt geared bulk carrier, a
45,000 dwt open hatch bulk carrier and a 66,000 dwt Panamax bulk carrier. These
are all single-deck ships with a double bottom, vertical cargo access through hatches
in the weatherdeck and a speed generally in the range of 13–16 knots, though the
average for most sizes is about 14.5 knots. Since the mid-1960s there has been a
steady upward trend in the size of ship used in most bulk trades. For example, in
1969 only about 5 per cent of the iron ore was shipped in vessels over 80,000 dwt,
but by the early 1990s over 80 per cent of the trade was shipped in vessels of this
size. Having made this point, the statistics of the bulk carrier fleet in Table 11.6
show that the ships in the bulk carrier fleet are spread fairly evenly across the size
range, with the greatest concentration in the smaller sizes.
Bulk carriers are generally designed for cheapness and simplicity. Key design
features are cubic capacity, access to the holds, and cargo handling gear. Hold
design is important because cargoes such as grain can easily shift and, if unchecked,
can capsize a ship. To prevent this bulk carriers generally have self-trimming
holds in which the topside wing tanks are sloped in such a way that granular
cargoes can be loaded by gravity without having to trim the cargo out into the
wings of the hold.
On conventional bulk carriers, hatch openings are generally 45–50 per cent of the
beam (width) and around 65–75 per cent of the hold’s length (see Figure 11.5a).
This arrangement has the disadvantage that hatch openings are too narrow to allow
vertical access to all parts of the cargo hold, with the result that it is difficult to handle
large cargo units such as rolls of paper, steel products, pre-slung timber, cars loaded
in pallets or containers in a single operation. However, because the deck makes an
important contribution to the structural strength of the ship, wider hatches can only
be accommodated by adding structural steel to reinforce the vessel, thus increasing
costs. The hatch widths described above represent a trade-off between cargo handling
speed and building cost that has been found to work well in practice.
Most bulk carriers are fitted with steel hatch covers of which there are several
designs available. The self supporting type is probably the most popular. Each
cover is arranged in four to six sections which extend across the hatchway and
have rollers which operate on a runway. The covers are opened by rolling them to
the end of the hatch where they tip automatically into a vertical position. Another
consideration is whether or not to fit cargo handling gear. Cargo handling gear is
normally fitted to smaller bulk carriers, since they are more likely to operate into
ports with inadequate shore based facilities. Table 11.6 shows that only 86 bulk
carriers over 50,000 dwt have cargo handling gear, compared with 2,800 smaller
vessels. This is because the ports deep enough to be accessed by the bigger ships
almost always have shore based facilities.
The cargo handling gear may be cranes or derricks. Derricks are the traditional
means of cargo handling on merchant ships. A derrick consists of an ‘arm’ supported
by a rope anchored to a mast, with a winch providing the lifting power. The goods

403
FIGURE 11.5 General purpose bulk carriers
SHIPS FOR THE DRY BULK TRADES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
404
loaded onto the ship are lifted up, swung across and lowered into the hold. Modern
derricks, using bipod masts or Samson posts can handle very heavy cargoes. For
example the Stulcken derrick marketed by Bloem & Voss has a working load of
between 80 and 300 tons. Deck cranes, which came into use in the 1950s, provide a
more flexible alternative. Rigging time is negligible and the crane is able to pick up
and deposit its load anywhere within its working radius. A common arrangement for
handy bulk carriers is to fit four 15 or 25 ton cranes primarily serving holds 1–4 and
5. This arrangement is used for the Handy bulk carrier shown in Figure 11.5. Continuous
self-discharging bulk carriers take a more radical approach to cargo handling. They
use a shipboard conveyor system fed by gravity from the bottom of the holds. This
allows them to unload cargo at rates of up to 6,000 tons per hour, though the high cost
and the weight of the cargo handling equipment means that they are most economic
in short haul trades involving many cargo handling operations.
One of the most difficult questions facing the bulk carrier owner buying a ship
to trade on the charter market is ‘What size of vessel should I buy?’ There are
numerous influences on the size of bulk carrier but the principles of bulk shipping
discussed in chapter 9 suggest that the size of ship will depend on a trade-off
between three factors:
•  economies of scale;
•  the parcel sizes in which cargo is available;
•  available port draught and cargo handling facilities.
We have already discussed economies of scale in chapter 5. Very substantial cost
savings are achieved by using larger vessels; the size of these savings depend both
on the size of vessel used and the length of the voyage. The relative costs for large
and small ships on short and long voyages are illustrated in Table 11.7. A 15,170
dwt vessel costs about three times as much to run per ton of cargo as a 120,000 dwt
ship on a 1,000 mile round voyage—but on a 22,000 mile round voyage it costs
almost six times as much. This suggests that the shipowner should purchase the
largest ship possible, especially in long haul trades.
However, big ships face two important restrictions. The first is the maximum size
of delivery that an industry is able or willing to accept at any one time. In some
TABLE 11.7 Economies of scale in bulk shipping (per cent cost per ton mile)
Source: R.O.Goss and C.D.Jones, 1971: Tables 3

405
industries, stockpiles are only 10,000 or 15,000 tons and a delivery of 50,000 tons
would be too large. Second, there is the constraint on ship size imposed by port
draught since deep-draught vessels have access to fewer ports than shallow-draught
vessels (see Table 11.8). Limits may also be placed on overall length or beam or both
(either by ports or by canals). At the lower end of the scale, a small bulk carrier of
16,000 dwt is likely to have a draught of 7–9 metres and is able to access about three-
quarters of the world’s ports. As ships increase in size and draught, port access
diminishes. When considering Table 11.8 it is necessary to bear in mind that ship
designers can vary the draught/dwt ratio within certain limits. In addition, the measure
of accessible ports is very crude since some ports are more important than others in
the bulk trades and depth may vary substantially from berth to berth.
TABLE 11.8 Bulk carriers: the relationship between ship size, draught and port
access
Source: Sample of bulk carriers from the Clarkson ‘Bulk Carrier Register’ and ‘Ports of the World’
* The standard deviation shows the spread of the average size
To deal with these apparently conflicting requirements the bulk carrier market
has evolved into several different size bands, each focusing on a different sector of
the trade. At the smaller end of the range, ‘Handy’ bulk carriers of 10,000–30,000
dwt fill the role of highly flexible workhorses in trades where parcel size and draft
restrictions demand small ships. Typically they carry minor bulks and smaller
parcels of major bulks such as grain, coal and bauxite. As ports have improved
over the last 20 years a new generation of larger 30–50,000 dwt handy bulkers has
emerged, generally referred to as ‘Handymax’ bulk carriers. Like the Handy bulkers,
these vessels are generally geared. In the centre of the market are the Panamax
bulk carriers of 55,000–70,000 dwt, which service the trades in coal, grain, bauxite
and the larger minor bulk parcels. The upper end is served by bulk carriers of
100,000–300,000 dwt, which are heavily dependent on the iron ore and coal trades.
There is a good deal of interchange between these size groups and in the last resort
the choice is a trade-off between unit cost and cargo flexibility: the small vessel is
flexible but expensive to run, while the large vessels become progressively cheaper
and more inflexible.
SHIPS FOR THE DRY BULK TRADES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
406
The open hatch bulk carrier (conbulker)
The ‘open hold’ bulk carrier offers a solution to the limited access to the hold
provided by conventional bulk carriers. They have hatches the full width of the
vessel, allowing large cargo units to be dropped into place, as shown in Figure
11.5b. This vessel has eight holds with hatch openings the full width of the vessel.
This is particularly useful in the forest products trades where most of these vessels
are employed. Where possible the holds/hatches are designed around standard
cargo unit sizes with special attention paid to cargo handling gear. Often a gantry
crane is fitted.
During the 1970s it also became apparent that the open hold bulk carrier had a
role to play as a link between the dry bulk and liner sectors of the market. With the
proliferation of containerized cargo across a wide range of general cargo trades,
the opportunities for using open or wide hatch bulk carriers in the liner trades
became apparent. They also offer the option to carry containers on the outward leg
and dry bulk on the return leg. This is particularly useful for repositioning empty
containers. Vessels built specifically for this type of trade are often known as
‘conbulkers’.
11.6 Ships for the liquid bulk trades
The transportation of bulk liquids by sea generally requires the use of tankers. The
main types of tanker are for the transport of oil products, crude oil, chemicals,
wine, molten sulphur or liquid gas.
Oil tankers (Table 11.9) form by far the largest fleet of specialist bulk vessels,
with a fleet of 3,130 vessels accounting for 37 per cent of the merchant fleet
measured in tons deadweight. The size of individual tankers is up to 550,000 dwt;
1,200 feet (370 metres) in length; 130 feet (40 metres) in breadth; and drawing up
to 75 feet (23 metres) of water. This fleet can usefully be subdivided into six
segments, Handy (10–50,000 dwt), Panamax (50–70,000 dwt), Aframax (70–
100,000 dwt), Suezmax (100–200,000 dwt, VLCC (200–300,000 dwt) and ULCCs
(over 300,000 dwt). Each of these segments operates as a separate market and,
from a ship design viewpoint, each has its own specific requirements. The smaller
tankers under 50,000 dwt are mainly used for the transport of oil products (see the
next section for details) and the larger vessels for the transport of crude oil.
There are two different designs for oil tankers, single hull and double hull.
Until the 1990s almost all crude oil tankers had a single skin, using the hull as the
main containment vessel and in 1996 86 per cent of the tanker fleet was single
hull. The main features of the single hull design are shown by the hull cross
section of a 38,000 dwt products tanker in Figure 11.6a. Two longitudinal bulkheads
run the length of the ship from the bow to the engine room, dividing the hull into
three sets of tanks, the port wing tanks, the centre wing tanks, and the starboard
wing tanks. Transverse bulkheads running across the ship divide these three sets of
tanks into separate cargo compartments. Tankers typically have five to seven
transverse bulkheads dividing the cargo area into fifteen to twenty-four cargo
compartments. In addition to strengthening the hull, the bulkheads restrict the

407
movement of the cargo by the motion of the ship and limit the leakage of oil if the
hull is damaged. In single hull vessels it is usual to allocate two of the wing tanks
as ‘segregated ballast tanks’ (SBT), which means they are only used for ballast
water.8
IMO Regulation 13F requires tankers ordered after 6 July 1993 to be of double
hull construction as a protective measure against oil loss. A typical arrangement is
shown in Figure 11.6a for a small tanker and Figure 11.6b for a large vessel. The
regulations lay down precise rules regarding the width of the double side and the
double bottom, but the principle is simple enough. There must be a second skin to
limit the outflow of oil in the event of collision damage to the outer hull.
Cargo handling is an important aspect of tanker design. Rapid loading and
discharge requires powerful pumps. Crude tankers rely on shore based facilities
for locking, but carry their own cargo pumps for discharge. The pump room is
generally located between the cargo tanks and the engine room. A network of
pipes run along the deck, linking the cargo tanks to two banks of manifolds, one
on each side of the ship. To load or discharge cargo the manifolds are connected to
the shore based pipe system by flexible hoses, which are handled by the ship’s
cranes. The flow of oil is controlled by valves operated from a control panel on
TABLE 11.9 The tanker fleet, January 1996 by size and hull characteristics
Source: Tanker Register 1996, Clarkson Research Studies, London
SHIPS FOR THE LIQUID BULK TRADES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
408
FIGURE 11.6 Tanker design; (a) 38,000 products tanker; (b) 300,000 dwt double
hull crude tanker

409
the bridge and must conform to a plan which minimizes stress on the hull (an
incorrect load or discharge sequence can literally sink the ship!).
Products tankers
Within the oil tanker fleet products tankers form a separate category of vessel, but
one which is not clearly defined in statistical terms because the distinction between
crude and products tankers is blurred. Clean products tankers are similar to crude
oil tankers but generally smaller. Most products tankers are 10–50,000 dwt, though
there is a significant fleet of 50–80,000 dwt products tankers and two zinc coated
vessels over 200,000 dwt. Figure 11.6a shows the outline design of a modern
products tanker. This 38,000 dwt tanker has eight cargo holds with a cargo heating
system for very heavy oils and a submerged cargo pump in each hold (deep well
pump), allowing separate grades of cargo to be carried in each tank. Products
tankers generally have tank coatings to prevent cargo contamination. Since these
vessels can easily be used for crude trading, it is not a distinct category.
Chemical parcel tankers
One of the areas of innovation in recent years has been in the design of ships to
carry small liquid bulk parcels of 2,000–6,000 tons. Typically these include products
such as vegetable oils, lube oils, molasses, caustic soda, BTX, Styrene and a whole
range of specialist chemicals. If a small chemical tanker of the appropriate size is
used the freight cost is prohibitively high, on a long journey from Europe to the
Far East reaching as much as $100 per ton. The alternative is to ship the cargo in
a ‘parcel tanker’ designed to carry many small parcels within a single ship. Over
the last 30 years a sophisticated transport system has developed to handle these
small cargoes.
The structure of the transport system is illustrated in Figure 11.7. On the right
are listed the various commodities which appear on the market in parcels of under
10,000 tons. On the left of the diagram are the two fleets which transport these
parcels. First there is the parcel tanker fleet, consisting of 730 ships of 20 m.dwt,
ranging in size from 10,000 dwt to as much as 50,000 tons incorporating 40 or 50
parcel segmentations. At the bottom of the chart on the left is the fleet 580 small
tankers under 10,000 dwt which will offer transport on a one ship, one cargo
basis. The organization of transport falls into three categories. At the top are the
parcel tanker pools operated by companies like Stolt and Odfjell. They operate
large fleets of parcel tankers which offer liner services for large parcels. They
arrange transport on a contract of affreightment basis, with regular port itineraries
worked out to meet the needs of the trade. However, they also take cargoes from
the spot market where these are available at an acceptable rate and when the
destination fits in with the vessel operating pattern. The second group consists of
tramp parcel tankers. These are medium sized parcel vessels, often 10,000–20,000
dwt which operate on the spot market, grouping together several spot parcels on a
voyager by voyage basis. Finally, there are the small tanker operators who generally
operate on the spot market, picking up whatever parcels are available, but may be
SHIPS FOR THE LIQUID BULK TRADES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
410
engaged on a time charter or a consecutive voyage basis. These small vessels tend
to operate within the regions, particularly Europe and Asia.
The design of chemical parcel tankers is regulated by the IMO Convention on
the Carriage of Dangerous Chemicals by Sea. This divides potentially dangerous
cargoes into three categories, referred to as IMO Type I, Type II, and Type III.
The most hazardous liquids must be carried in Type I tanks. These are the chemicals
which are not biodegradable in the sense that once they are released in the sea they
build up in marine organisms. Parcel tanks approved for the carriage of these
chemicals must have double bottoms and be located not less than one-fifth of the
ship’s breadth from the ship’s sides measured at the water line. This means that
IMO Type I tanks are generally located in the centre of the ship. Type II tanks
must also have a double skin protecting them from collision damage. Finally IMO
Type III cargoes can be carried in standard tankers.
A separate issue is the protection and cleaning of the tanks. There are three methods
FIGURE 11.7 Small parcel market
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

411
commonly used in parcel tankers, stainless steel for corrosive cargo and zinc silicate
or epoxy coatings which suit most others. The chemical tanker shown in Figure
11.8a has thirty-seven parcel tanks, of which twenty-nine are stainless steel and eight
are zinc silicate. The size of the tanks varies a great deal. The smallest are 359 cubic
metres, while the largest are 2,491 cubic metres. Finally the ship must have a flexible
cargo handling system with the ability to handle the contents of each tank separately,
usually by means of a separate deep well pump in each tank.
Solvents carriers are the simplest and oldest chemical tankers and some are
classified as products tankers. The ‘solvents’ they carry are mainly the refinery
products—naptha, benzene, toluene, xylene, alcohols and their derivatives. If there
is no suitable solvent cargo available, the vessels will try to ‘downgrade’ to carry
clean petroleum products. Specialized chemical tankers include the relatively
sophisticated vessels specifically designed for a particular trade. They usually carry
lubricating oils, vegetable oils or molasses. Molten sulphur carriers are a separate
entity as they carry only sulphur, which needs much higher temperatures (80+°C)
than the other cargoes. The ships have special equipment including heating coils,
stainless steel tanks, special valve gear and inert gas systems to prevent explosions.
Special loading and discharging facilities are required, so the trade is generally
conducted under long-term contract mainly for the export trades of liquid sulphur
from the USA, France and Poland.
Liquid gas tankers
Liquid gas tankers are a comparatively recent development. The two main types
used are LNG carriers and LPG carriers. The difference between LNG and LPG
carriers is essentially one of temperature. Liquefied petroleum gas and the chemical
gases that are shipped in LPG carriers do not need the extremes of refrigeration (-
163°C) or equivalent pressure required for the transport of liquefied natural gas.
Most of the gases they carry need at most -51°C or equivalent pressure. There is
one exception, ethylene, which needs -104°C and usually travels in small ethylene
carriers. There are, however, large ethylene carriers, which are hybrid ships capable
of carrying LNG and/or LPG.
LNG carriers are almost always purpose-built for a specific trade route. The
gas is liquefied by refrigeration and is transported at atmospheric pressure in
insulated tanks. Several different designs are currently in use. Owing to the high
cost of shore-based liquefaction and handling facilities, LNG carriers generally
form part of a carefully planned through transport operation. They range in size
up to 125,000 cubic metres.
The majority of the LPG carriers are employed in carrying liquefied petroleum
gases (propane, butane, propane/butane mix and isobutane), which make up by far
the largest seaborne trade. Other less important gas cargoes are ammonia, ethylene,
propylene, butadiene and vinyl chloride. LPG accounts for an even greater share
of the ship demand because of the large volume shipped on long haul routes,
especially from the Arabian Gulf to Japan. The ships have pressurized and insulated
cargo tanks.
SHIPS FOR THE LIQUID BULK TRADES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
412
FIGURE 11.8 Parcel tanker

413
11.7 Combined carriers
Combined carriers, OBOs
Combined carriers deserve a section to themselves, if only as an example of the
pitfalls awaiting investors who abandon the KISS principle (see section 11.3). To
give greater flexibility, oil/bulk/ore carriers often referred to as OBOs or ‘combined
carriers’, are designed to carry a full cargo of dry bulk, e.g. ore, coal, grain,
phosphates, etc., or a liquid cargo such as crude oil. This offers shipowners the
opportunity to switch between the tanker and dry bulk markets when there is a rate
advantage to be gained, or to reduce ballast time by carrying dry and liquid cargoes
on alternate legs (‘triangulation voyages’). In practice the rewards for flexibility
have been slim.
The concept of carrying oil and dry cargo in the same ship can be traced back to
the early days of the oil trade. The first ocean-going tank steamer, the Vaderland
(1872), was designed to carry passengers from Belgium to the United States and
return with a cargo of petroleum. The owners were not able to obtain a licence to
carry passengers and oil in the same ship so the Vaderland ended up carrying
general cargo in the petroleum tanks.9 In the 1920s two ore/oilers, the Svealand
and the Amerikaland were designed to carry iron ore from Peru to Baltimore,
returning with a cargo of oil. Again the plan was frustrated, this time by the high
transit charges for the Panama Canal. In the 1950s and 1960s combined carriers
achieved greater success, capitalizing on the newly emerging oil and dry cargo
trades.
Two different designs were used. The first to enter service in the 1950s were
the ore/oilers. These vessels had holds in the centre of the ship to carry the high
density iron ore, with side and bottom tanks designed to carry a full cargo of oil.
The use of separate compartments avoided the need for cleaning between cargoes,
but was wasteful of space and the dry leg was limited to high density iron ore. The
second design, which appeared in the mid-1960s, was the OBO (oil/bulk/ore)
which carried oil or dry bulk in the same cargo spaces. Typically these vessels
have double bottoms and eleven holds to carry oil, of which seven can be used for
ore or dry bulk. Hatch covers are oil-tight and gas-tight. Because the combined
carriers were able to switch between wet and dry markets, they made handsome
profits during the three tanker booms in 1967, 1970 and 1973 (see Chapter 2).
So great was the enthusiasm for combined carriers that by the mid-1970s a fleet
of 49 m.dwt had been built. The capacity of this fleet so exceeded the available
combined cargo voyages that the competitive advantage was lost. The indifferent
commercial performance of combined carriers was compounded by the fact that
the ships were complex to build, maintain and operate, costing about 15 per cent
more to run than a comparable tanker or bulk carrier. In the early 1990s operators
of combined carrier fleets were reporting a 10–15 per cent revenue premium (say
$2,000–3,000/day), which paid the extra cost of operating the ship, but left little
surplus to cover the higher capital cost. To make matters worse, the large combined
carrier fleet ensured that surplus capacity was transmitted between the tanker and
COMBINED CARRIERS

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
414
dry bulk markets, helping to moderate market peaks. As a result from the mid-
1970s onwards few new ships were ordered and by the mid-1990s the combined
carrier fleet had fallen below 20 m.dwt. In retrospect the commercial failure of
the combined carrier fleet had less to do with the concept, which was perfectly
sound, than the method of implementation which was not.
11.8 Ships designed for a single commodity
A number of dry bulk cargoes present stowage or handling problems which have
resulted in specialist ships being built. Many ships could be included within this
category, but the main ones are ore carriers, forest products carriers, woodchip
carriers, cement carriers, vehicle carriers, refrigerated vessels and heavy lift vessels.
Ore carriers
Ore carriers originally found a market because of the high density of iron ore,
which stows at approximately 0.5 cubic metres per ton, compared with a normal
bulk carrier’s capacity of 1.3–1.4 cubic metres per ton. In the last decade, general-
purpose bulk carriers with strengthened holds or combined carriers have generally
been preferred owing to their more flexible trading opportunities, though a few
very large ore carriers have been built.
Forest products carriers
Forest products are another difficult commodity in terms of bulk transportation.
Cargo can stow at anything from 2.3 cubic metres per ton for pre-slung timber to
2.8 cubic metres per ton for logs and the heavy units are difficult to handle in a
conventional bulk carrier or ’tweendecker. Until the 1960s most forest products
travelled by liner but, as the volume of trade increased and conventional liners
were replaced by container ships on key routes such as Europe-Far East and the
North Atlantic, much of the trade moved into bulk vessels.
Initial attempts to use general-purpose bulk carriers for forest products proved
unsatisfactory owing particularly to the problems of cargo handling. This led to
the construction of large, open hold bulk carriers, which allowed pre-slung timber,
pulp and paper to be loaded and stowed by crane. Extensive shipboard cargo
handling gear is generally fitted and sizes range up to 55,000 dwt. Woodchip
carriers have a high internal cubic capacity to accommodate the low-density
woodchips. Woodchip vessels may be fitted with gantry cranes, though shore-
based pneumatic handling equipment is often used.
Cement carriers
Cement is a difficult and dusty cargo to handle, and some specialist cement carriers
have been built. They incorporate pneumatic cargo handling gear with totally
enclosed holds and moisture control systems. In principle, they can be used for
any cargo with a fine particle size.

415
Vehicle carriers
Another problem area is wheeled cargo. Initially cars were shipped in cargo liners
but, as the volume of seaborne trade increased in the 1960s, bulk shipment became
possible. The first development was to fit bulk carriers with car decks that could
fold up to allow other bulk cargoes to be carried—a classic combined voyage was
cars from Emden to San Francisco with cars, returning with grain to Rotterdam.
However, the low carrying capacity of car bulkers (one car per 13 dwt), combined
with the additional weight of the decks, the slow loading and a high risk of damage
in transit, made them a poor compromise. As the car trade grew in size in the
1970s, purpose-built vehicle carriers were built to carry new cars and small
commercial vehicles, such as vans and pick-ups. They have multiple-decks
(anything from four to ten depending on size) with a high cubic capacity to dwt
ratio (e.g. one car per 3 dwt), high speed (around 20 knots for the bigger ones),
roll-on, roll-off loading/discharging facilities and internal decks and ramps carefully
designed to speed cargo handling and minimize damage. Lloyd’s Register separates
them from other vessels with ro-ro facilities by ruling that ro-ros carry vehicles
(including trains) as conveyances of passengers or cargo, whereas in vehicle carriers
the payload is the vehicles themselves.
The fleet varies in size and operation from ships of 499 grt with four decks
each, carrying 500 cars in the European short sea trades up to Wallenius’ Madame
Butterfly of 27,779 dwt carrying 6,200 cars world-wide. Specialization brought a
cost in terms of restricting the cargo to motor cars and light trucks. With the more
volatile market of the late 1970s there was a move towards developing vehicle
carriers capable of handling a wider range of cargo. The Hual Trotter (1983) can
carry 3,710 cars on ten decks but decks three, five and seven are strengthened for
unit loads of up to 150 tons, and height is adjustable by hoisting decks four, six
and eight. This allows bulk parcels of cars to be supplemented by consignments of
large vehicles such as trucks, buses and agricultural machinery, which cannot be
accommodated between the narrow decks of a conventional car carrier.
Refrigerated vessels
Refrigerated vessels (reefers) were developed in the late nineteenth century for the
carriage of meat from New Zealand and Australia to the United Kingdom. The
first shipowner to use this process is reputed to have used wool to insulate the
holds and when the vessel docked in London to have sold the wool as well as the
meat cargo. Reefer cargo is either frozen or chilled, in which case the temperature
is maintained just above freezing. To achieve this reefer vessels have insulated
cargo holds with cargo handled horizontally through side ports and vertically
through hatches.
Modern vessels, an example of which is illustrated in the lower half of Figure
11.8b, have their cargo spaces designed for palletized cargo and there may also be
reefer container capacity on deck or in the holds. This particular vessel of 500,000
cubic feet has five holds with four decks in three holds and three decks in the other
two. Size varies enormously, ranging up to 700,000 cubic feet in the deep sea
SHIPS DESIGNED FOR A SINGLE COMMODITY

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
416
trades (about 15,000 dwt). For fruit and vegetables the cargo continues to ripen
during transit, so the refrigeration system must maintain a precisely controlled
temperature in all parts of the cargo spaces. Since fruit cargoes such as bananas are
frequently loaded in developing countries with poor port facilities, there is often a
need to make the ships self-sufficient in terms of cargo handling. Cars are often
carried as a backhaul.
Although reefers still dominate the refrigerated cargo trade, frozen foods are
also transported in a wide range of other ship types, particularly reefer containers
carried in container ships, ro-ros, or cargo liners. This makes the trade difficult to
analyse as a whole.
Heavy lift vessels
Multipurpose vessels with heavy lift capacity and ro-ros can carry unit loads of up
to 100 tons, but there is a demand for small vessels capable of carrying much
larger loads (e.g. up to 500 tons) or on routes where liner companies do not offer
heavy lift capabilities. Many different designs are used, including float-on and
conventional crane loading using Stulken cranes.
11.9 Marine service vessels
Non-cargo and service vessels cover a wide variety of ships from a 200 grt tug to
a 70,000 grt passenger liner. Statistics are sketchy and classification difficult because
of the multitude of uses to which the small vessels can be put. This makes it
difficult to analyse the demand for each type with any authority. Although these
vessels represent only 7 per cent of the fleet in gross tonnage terms, they are much
more important to the industry in value and number. Over 70 per cent of non-
cargo carrying vessels may be under 500 grt, but by number they make up nearly
half of the world’s shipping fleet.
The fishing fleet
Fishing vessels account for nearly half the non-cargo carrying fleet by tonnage.
The fleet includes both fishing vessels and fish factories. The world fishing fleet
grew rapidly at 15 per cent per annum in the 1960s and then started to stabilize in
the face of overfished oceans, escalating costs and the uncertainty of offshore
limits.
Supply ships and tenders
Supply ships and tenders are used in the offshore industry in oil and gas.
With the increasing depth and distance from shore at which the work is taking
place, proportionally more and larger vessels are needed. There has also
been a trend towards building more highly powered, sophisticated, multi-

417
purpose vessels, especially for use in the bad weather areas of the North Sea
and Gulf of Alaska.
Tugs and dredgers
Tugs and dredgers form part of the fleet related to the seabed activity and there
has also been a growing demand from harbour and canal authorities. One of the
reasons for the faster growth was the change in trading patterns towards the
developing countries and the use of larger ships. The growing interest in the
resources of the seabed also generated a growing market for research, survey
vessels and icebreakers.
Passenger vessels
Passenger vessels suffered in the 1960s when air transport practically killed demand
for regular services of large passenger liners. Because existing vessels were too
large and fast to be economic as cruise ships, the mid-1970s saw a steady decline
in the number of liners operating, with ships even less than 10 years old being
taken out of service and often converted to vehicle carriers. However, the 1980s
and 1990s brought a revival of the cruise market.
11.10 Economic criteria for evaluating ship design
So far we have discussed the options that may confront a shipowner contemplating
an investment decision. For the many practical reasons discussed it is not easy to
evaluate these options in financial or economic terms, and there is a temptation
to suggest that ship design is a matter for commercial flair or ‘gut feeling’ rather
than rigorous economic analysis. However, in all but a very few cases, the
commercial world demands that decisions of this type should be supported by
economic analysis.
There is substantial literature on the evaluation of alternative ship designs.10
For practical purposes, the analysis needs to be carried out at two levels, which we
will refer to here as market research and operational analysis.
Market research
Market research is concerned with analysing the economic performance of the
ship within the company’s overall shipping activities. For a charter market operator
this analysis might involve an examination of the type of vessel that will be easy to
charter and its potential resale value. A liner operator might study the type of ship
required to handle changes in the pattern of trade or competition on major routes.
This is closely aligned to the market research analysis described in Chapter 14.
Through market research the owner can develop a specification for the type of
ECONOMIC CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING SHIP DESIGN

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
418
shipping operation in which the vessel is to be used and the performance parameters
that the vessel must satisfy.
Operational analysis
The next step is to identify the ship design that meets the performance requirements
most effectively, using some form of economic measure of merit. For example,
the designer may be told that the owner requires a product tanker with the following
features:
•  a draught of not more than 10 metres;
•  a length of not more than 170 metres;
•  ability to carry simple chemicals such as caustic soda;
•  cargo tanks that are cheap to clean;
•  an operating speed of 14 knots;
•  about 35,000–40,000 dwt cargo capacity for products.
Although this list of requirements appears to be highly specific, in practice there
may not be a unique solution. On examination, it may transpire that some of the
requirements are inconsistent or very difficult to achieve. For example, it may be
difficult to achieve the design draught within the other specified parameters, or
doing so may result in a vessel with poor fuel economy. The cost of developing a
‘clean tank’ design may also turn out to be very considerable, involving double
skin construction. Did the shipowner appreciate this when he laid down the
specification and is he prepared to pay the cost? These are all issues that have to be
tackled at the operational analysis stage.
The task of the ship designer is to evaluate the various options in economic
terms to see which gives the best overall result, recognizing both cost and operational
performance. Buxton suggests two different ways of doing this, depending on the
circumstances:11
1  Net present value (NPV). This technique involves setting up a projected
cashflow for each of the options under consideration. Revenues and costs are
projected on an annual basis over the life of the ship and the net cashflow in
each year is calculated, taking account of capital payments, trading income
and expenditure, and probably the final resale value of the vessel. These annual
cashflows are then discounted back to the present (using a minimum acceptable
interest rate) and summed, giving the net present value of each of the options.
The option giving the highest NPV is generally preferred.
This technique is widely used in business for evaluating capital expenditure
projects, and many companies incorporate it as part of their capital expenditure
system. The advantage is that it takes account of both the cost and revenue flows,
and produces a single figure, which makes the comparison of options a simple
matter. On the negative side, the revenue flow may in some cases be extremely
difficult to project and arbitrary assumptions about the potential earning power

419
of the vessel may give a distorted result. For this reason, the NPV approach is
most satisfactory for evaluating ships being constructed for a long-term time
charter.
2  Required freight rate (RFR). This method avoids the problem of cost of the
predicting revenue by comparing the relative unit transport different ship
types. The RFR is calculated by computing the annual average cost of running
the ship (operating plus voyage costs), adding the capital costs and dividing
by the annual tonnage of cargo transported. There are several different ways
of carrying out this calculation, but all aim to show which ship design will
give the lowest unit transportation cost within the parameters specified by the
owner.
There are several variations on these two methods, notably the yield or internal
rate of return, which is closely related to the NPV method (being the interest rate
that produces an NPV of zero), and the permissible price, which can be derived
from either method.
11.11 Summary
This chapter has reviewed ships used in the shipping business. We started with two
important observations. First, because the demand for merchant ships is derived
from the demand for transport, we cannot determine the demand for merchant
ships simply by examining the cargo flows. Shipowners are free to use whatever
ships they think will provide the service most profitably. We must consider a
wider range of economic factors which include the type of cargo, the type of
shipping operation and the owner’s commercial philosophy. Second ‘ship types’
should not be viewed in terms of physical design characteristics. From the
shipowner’s point of view ships of the same type are substitutes in the market
place. In particular, size plays an important part in determining ship type.
An examination of the relationship between cargo units and ship types shows
that some ships, such as the multi-purpose cargo liners or ro-ros, are highly flexible
and capable of carrying six or seven different types of cargo units, while others,
such as the container ship, the gas carrier or the crude oil tanker, are highly
specialized and are capable of carrying only one cargo. In terms of the revenue
maximization calculations described in chapter 3, the flexible ship has a better
chance of achieving a high level of loaded days at sea and deadweight utilization
because it is capable of carrying many different cargo types. The cost of this
flexibility occurs in terms of higher capital cost and, in some cases, lower operating
efficiency than the more specialized vessel. Recently the trend has been decisively
towards specialized ships with low LCM ratios.
In the liner business, the three main types of purpose-built vessels are container
ships, multi-purpose cargo ships and ro-ros. Most of the ships employed in the
liner trades are purpose built within these general categories. There used to be an
enormous number of different and unique ship specifications designed to fit particular
trades, but containerization has brought a high degree of standardization to ships
used in the liner trades. There are still a few ships in the fleet designed for cargo
SUMMARY

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPS AND SHIP DESIGNS
420
flexibility, notably the multi-purpose and ‘tweendeckers which can switch between
general cargo and dry bulk. The popularity of these ships with investors declined
during the 1980s and the fleets are declining.
In the dry bulk market, the trend towards single purpose vessels continues. The
general-purpose bulk carrier dominates the business, despite being restricted to the
carriage of dry bulk cargoes. More flexible dry bulk vessels are the ’tweendecker
which can trade either in bulk or general cargo; the open hold bulk carrier which
can trade in homogeneous dry bulk, containers and specialized bulks such as forest
products; and the combined carrier which can alternate between dry bulk and
crude oil and other liquids. All have been losing market share, especially the
combined carrier.
Finally, there is a range of specialist ships designed for the bulk transport of
specific cargoes. The most prominent of these are liquefied gas carriers, refrigerated
cargo ships, car carriers, heavy lift ships, and cement carriers. In some cases, such
as gas carriers, these ships are totally specialized and are in competition only with
other ships of the same type, whereas others, such as the refrigerated cargo ship,
the car carrier or the heavy lift vessel, face competition from multi-purpose vessels.
The key point in all of this is that most cargoes can be transported in several
different types of ship. In the last resort, the ship in which the cargo travels is
determined by commercial performance rather than its specific technical design
characteristics.
