421
Chapter 12
The regulatory
framework of maritime
economics
Whosoever commands the sea commands the trade; whosoever commands
the trade of the world commands the riches of the world and consequently
the world itself.
(Judicious and Select Essays and Observations by that Renowned and
Learned Knight Sir Walter Raleigh, upon the First Invention of
Shipping, London, H.Moseley, 1650)
Chapter 12

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
422
12.1 How maritime regulation affects maritime economics
Shipowners, like most businessmen, find that regulation often conflicts with their
efforts to earn a reasonable return on their investment. When Captain Plimsoll
first started his campaign against the notorious ‘coffin ships’ in the 1870s, British
shipowners argued that the imposition of loadlines would put them at an unfair
competitive advantage. Fayle observes that:
In their efforts to raise both the standard of safety and the standard of working
conditions afloat, the Board of Trade frequently found themselves, during the
last quarter of the nineteenth century, at loggerheads with the shipowners. They
were accused of cramping the development of the industry by laying down hard-
and-fast rules which in effect punished the whole of the industry for the sins of a
small minority, and hampering British shipping in international competition, by
imposing restrictions from which foreign ships were free, even in British ports.1
The same, sometimes legitimate, resistance to regulation is found in most industries,
but the world’s oceans provide the shipping industry with an unrivalled opportunity to
bypass the clutches of regulators and thereby gain an economic advantage. The goal of
maritime regulators is to close the net. As a result, in the last 50 years the regulatory
regime has become a central factor in the economics of the shipping market.
It would, however, be wrong to think that the regulatory process is just concerned
with pursuing villains. A few regulations are made in response to particular incidents.
The Titanic, the Torrey Canyon, the Herald of Free Enterprise and the Exxon
Valdez all provoked a public outcry which led to new regulations. However these
are the exceptions. Over the last century the shipping industry and the maritime
states have evolved a complex regulatory system which impacts on all aspects of
the economics of operating ships. The design of the ship, maintenance standards,
crewing costs, operating standards, company overheads, taxation, commercial
confidentiality, pollution liability, and cartels are all subject to regulation. As we
shall see in the course of this chapter, there are many more examples. Thus a
knowledge of maritime regulation has become an essential part of the maritime
economist’s toolkit.
The aim of this chapter is to discuss the international regulatory framework of
maritime economics and the legal and political issues that have influenced, and in
some cases dominated, the maritime scene since the mid-1960s. The chapter seeks
to answer three questions:
1  Who regulates shipping and commerce?
2  What do they regulate?
3  How do regulations affect shipping economics?
The intention is simply to gain an understanding of the areas of shipping which
these regulations affect, and the general procedures by which they are made and
changed. We also address the question of ownership of the world fleet and the
major issue of flags of registration.

423
12.2 The institutions that regulate shipping
The three regulatory regimes
The first step is to identify the regulators. In an ideal world we might expect there
to be a supreme legislative body which makes laws and an international court that
tries cases against them. Unfortunately reality does not live up to this ideal and
probably never will. Indeed some experts doubt whether what passes for
international law is really ‘law’ at all.2 There is an International Court of Justice,
but its rulings on shipping matters are purely advisory. We should not be surprised
at this state of affairs. There are 163 countries with interest in shipping, each with
its own national priorities.3 Gaining agreement on a body of international law, far
less approving an international executive to enforce the laws, is hardly likely to
succeed.
As a result, the regulatory system we discuss in this chapter is a second best
solution. It consists of an ad hoc mix of rules and regulations enacted and enforced
by three different regulatory authorities:4
1
The classification societies. The shipping industry has its own system for
regulating the technical and operational standard of ships. The classification
societies make rules for ship construction and maintenance and issue a ‘class
certificate’ to reflect compliance.
2
The flag states. The primary legal authority governing the activities of merchant
ships is the state in which the ship is registered, the flag state. By custom this
state is responsible for regulating all aspect of the commercial and operational
performance of the ship. International laws are developed by the participation
of flag states in treaties or conventions.
3
The coastal states. A ship is also subject to the laws of the coastal state in
whose waters it is trading. The extent of each state’s territorial waters and the
scope of regulation varies from one country to another.
In the following sections we will consider each of these regulatory regimes.
12.3 Self-regulation and the classification societies
The shipping industry’s own regulatory system arose from the efforts of insurers
to establish that the vessels for which they were writing insurance were sound. In
the middle of the eighteenth century they formed the first Classification Society
and classification societies have now become an integral part of the maritime
regulatory scene. During the intervening period their activities have become so
closely involved with the regulatory activities of governments that it is often difficult
to separate the two. In this section we will focus exclusively on the role of
classification societies as non-legal bodies. We will try to define why they were set
up, how they have evolved, the scope of their functions today and the impact
which this has on maritime economics.
SELF-REGULATION AND THE CLASSIFICATION SOCIETIES

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
424
Origin of the classification societies
Like many other shipping institutions the classification societies are very much a
product of their past. Knowing something of their history helps to explain the
current structure. Lloyds Register of Shipping (LR), the first classification society,
can trace its origins back to Lloyds Coffee House in the early 1700s. The proprietor,
Edward Lloyd, presumably in an effort to attract clients, started to circulate lists
giving details of vessels which might appear for insurance.5 The next step came in
1764 when a committee of London insurers and insurance brokers published the
first Register of ships. This register ‘classified’ ships according to their quality. It
listed a grade ‘conferred on the ship by the Committee’s appointed surveyors’.6
The ‘green book’, as it was known, was compiled by insurers for the sole use of
members of the society and contained details of 15,000 ships. All went well until
the 1797–8 register when a new grading system was introduced. The new system
based the ship’s class on the river of build, favouring the Thames. This grading
system was disputed by shipowners and in 1799 they published a rival register, the
New Register Book of Shipping, known as ‘red book’. There followed a period of
punitive competition which brought both registers close to bankruptcy. In 1834
the differences were settled and a new society was set up to produce a shipping
register which was acceptable to all sections of the industry. The new publication
was Lloyds Register of British & Foreign Shipping Its governing body had twenty-
four members, eight each from among the merchants, the shipowners, and the
underwriters, making it representative of the shipping industry as a whole.7
The new society had sixty-three surveyors and a system of regular inspection
for ships was instituted. The main function continued to be the production of a
register grading ships, but a new classification system was introduced:
Class A:
The ship had not passed a prescribed age and had been kept in the
highest state of repair.
Class E:
Ships which, though not fit for carrying dry cargo, were considered
perfectly safe for carrying cargoes not damaged by the sea.
Class I:
Ships unsuitable for dry cargo, but fit for short voyages (not out of
Europe)
The condition of the anchors, cables and stores when satisfactory was indicated by
1 and when unsatisfactory by 2. This system gave rise to the familiar expression
‘A1 condition’. In the first five years 15,000 vessels were surveyed and ‘classed’.
As the class movement developed in the nineteenth century, the role of
classification societies changed. At first the main job was to grade ships. As time
passed they started to set the standards to which ships should be built and maintained.
Blake (1960) comments: ‘As its authority grew, the Committee took upon itself
something like disciplinary powers. Any new vessel for which an A1 classification
was sought must undergo a survey under construction, which meant in effect that
its progress was closely inspected at least three times while the hull was still on the
stocks.’ A1 became a requirement rather than a grade in a scale.
Technical committees were set up to write rule books setting the precise standards

425
to which merchant ships should be built and maintained. These rules set the standards
and the society policed them through their network of Ships Surveyors.
Other classification societies were set up in the nineteenth century. The American
Bureau of Shipping (ABS) has its origins in the American Ship Masters Association
which was organized in 1860 and incorporated in 1862 through an Act of
Legislature of the State of New York. Like LR it is a non-profit making organization
with general management vested in the membership comprising individuals
prominent in the marine and off-shore industries and related fields. Most were
non-profit making organizations managed by Boards drawn from all parts of the
maritime industry—ship builders, shipowners, insurers, etc. Although underwriters
still participate in general management through membership of these boards, the
classification societies can no longer be seen as acting exclusively for the insurers.
The classification societies today
Today the main job of the classification societies is to ‘enhance the safety of life
and property at sea by securing high technical standards of design, manufacture,
construction and maintenance of mercantile and non-mercantile shipping’. The
Classification Certificate remains the mainstay of their authority. A shipowner
must class his vessel to obtain insurance and in some instances a government may
require a ship to be classed. However, the significance of the Classification
Certificate extends beyond insurance. It is the industry standard for establishing
that a vessel is properly constructed and in good condition.
Although the major societies do not distribute profits, they depend on client
revenue to cover their costs and are subject to commercial pressures. As self-
funding organizations, their survival depends on maintaining a sufficiently large
fee paying membership to recover their costs. There is, therefore, intense competition
between classification societies to attract members, leading to the anomaly that
they are paid by the same shipowners on whom they have to impose financial
penalties through their regulatory inspections. This led to criticism that shipowners
were avoiding carrying out essential maintenance by re-classing to a society with
less exacting standards.
Most of the large classification societies also supplement their income by
undertaking technical inspection work on behalf of governments. Since government
regulations cover much of the same ground as class rules, this leads to the confusion
of the role of the class societies and government regulators. There are currently
more than fifty classification societies operating world-wide, some large and
prominent, others small and obscure. The list of the larger societies and the number
of cargo ships they class, shown in Table 12.1 gives a rough idea of the relative
prominence of the various institutions. These are all well-known names in shipping
circles and together they cover over 90 per cent of the cargo and passenger fleet
(note that these numbers do not include the many small non-cargo carrying vessels
which the societies also class). Because they developed independently, the
classification societies do not have common rulebooks. At one level this is a source
of inconvenience. A repeat design built for one class society may have to be reworked
SELF-REGULATION AND THE CLASSIFICATION SOCIETIES

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
426
to meet the requirements of another. Differences in rules can increase the building
cost of a ship by millions of dollars. As governments have also become active in
setting technical standards for ship construction, particularly through the
International Maritime Organization, the need for co-ordination has increased.
To address this problem, in 1968 the International Association of Classification
Societies (IACS) was set up. Its eleven members hold about 90 per cent of the
world market for classification and statutory services and includes the ten societies
listed in Table 12.1. The association has two aims. The first is to introduce an
element of uniformity into the rules developed by class societies. The second is to
provide a representative group who could interface with other major rule-setting
organizations, principally IMO.
Over the last 30 years IACS has developed more than 160 sets of unified
requirements. These relate to many factors of which a few are minimum longitudinal
strength, loading guidance information, the use of steel grades for various hull
members. Another function of IACS is to collaborate with outside organizations
and in particular IMO. To enable IACS to carry out this role more effectively, in
1969 IMO granted IACS ‘consultative status’. The fact that it is the only non-
governmental organization with observer status at the IMO neatly illlustrates the
ambiguous position of the class societies, hovering somewhere between the
commercial shipping industry and governments.
In addition to their role as regulators, the major classification societies represent
the largest single concentration of technical expertise available to the shipping
industry. An example of a classification society helps to illustrate the nature of the
structure. Lloyds Register, the largest classification society, has over 3,900 people,
of whom half are qualified engineers, operating from 260 offices world-wide.
These staff perform classification against its own rules (around 6,600 ships
annually); statutory certification against international conventions, codes and
TABLE 12.1 The major classification societies, January 1997
Note: The statistics cover only vessels included in Clarkson Registers  
Source: Clarkson Research Studies

427
protocols; quality services; and a range of engineering services. The American
Bureau of Shipping (ABS) has a world-wide staff of 1,475 including 300 engineers
located in 15 offices world-wide and 425 exclusive surveyors in 160 locations.
For comparison the International Maritime Organization (IMO) has a secretariat
staff of about 300. Many important bulk shipping companies have less than 100
shore-based staff. In these circumstances it is easy to see why, in addition to the
classification role, the class societies have developed a major role as technical
advisers to shipowners and governments.
The regulatory activities of the classification societies
Despite their obvious importance, the classification societies have no legal authority.
There is no requirement for a shipowner to obtain classification, but classification is
generally necessary to obtain insurance, and a ship would have little value without it.
The voluntary nature of classification means that classification societies compete
with each other to offer classification services to shipowners and do so on the value
of their rules and their ability to implement them efficiently. The service they offer
today has two fundamental aspects, developing rules and implementing them.
First, the continuous updating of rules to reflect changes in marine technology.
Procedures vary, but most societies develop their rules through a committee structure,
involving experts from various scientific disciplines and technical activities including
naval architect, marine engineers, underwriters, owners, builders, operators, materials
manufacturers, machinery fabricators and individuals in other related fields. This
process takes into account the activities of IMO and IACS unified requirements.
The second stage involves the application of the rules to practical shipbuilding
and shipping. This is a three-step procedure:
1  A technical plan review. The plans of the ship are submitted to the classification
society for inspection, to ensure that the mechanical structural details in the
design of the ship conforms to the rules. If the plans are found satisfactory
they are passed and construction can proceed. Sometimes modifications are
required, or explanations required on certain points.
2  Surveys during construction to verify that the approved plans are implemented,
good workmanship practices are employed and that rules are followed. This
includes the testing of materials and major components such as engines, forgings
and boilers.
3  Periodic surveys for the maintenance of class. Merchant ships are required to
undergo a scheme of surveys while in service to verify their acceptability for
classification.
The classification procedures for classing existing ships are, in general terms, agreed
by IACS for members and associates. The regulations imposed by Lloyds Register
are; hull and machinery special survey—five years; dry-docking survey—two-and-
a-half-years; hull and machinery annual survey—one year; tail shaft inspection—
five years; boiler survey—two-and-a-half years. The hull and machinery survey is
very demanding, involving detailed inspection and measurement of the hull.
SELF-REGULATION AND THE CLASSIFICATION SOCIETIES

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
428
As the ship grows older, the scope of this inspection widens to cover those areas
of the ship which are vulnerable to ageing. For example, as oil tankers grow older
the area of the deck plate is subject to tests for corrosion increases. To avoid the
inconvenience and time out of service the classification societies allow a continuous
survey. Under this arrangement the ship is subject to a programme of rolling
inspections, with one-fifth of the ship being covered each year.
As more governments have acquired flag state regulatory authority over the last
30 years, the role of classification societies as representatives of governments has
increased. The most common authorizations are in connection with tonnage
measurement and loadlines; SOLAS, MARPOL and IMO standards on the
transportation of dangerous goods. In carrying out statutory work, the classification
society applies the standards relevant to the country of registry.
12.4 The law of the sea
Why the low of the sea matters
We now move on to the international legal system. Since maritime law is made
and enforced by nation states, we must briefly examine the legal frame work
which determines the rights and responsibilities of nations for their ocean going
merchant ships. There are two specific questions which arise when we start discussing
How the law affects shipping economics. First, which nation’s law applies to a
ship? Second, what are the rights of other nations over that ship as it moves about
the world? As we will see, these are very practical questions, the answers to which
can make a great deal of difference to the cost of running ships. Over the centuries
the world has evolved a set of customary rules for dealing with these questions,
known as the ‘law of the sea’.
The law of the sea: flag state versus coastal state
The debate over the legal responsibility for ships stretches back to the era when
naval power was the deciding factor. A country’s navy protected the ships flying
its flag. This established the principle, which survives today, of flag state
responsibility. However, coastal states also have a claim over ships visiting their
ports or sailing in their coastal waters. Early writers suggested that the distance
controlled by shore based canons should be the criterion for determining these
rights of the coastal states. In a world of rapidly growing commerce, agreeing
the respective rights of the the flag and coastal states has become a major issue.
Can a country ban alcohol on board foreign ships in its territorial waters? Or if
it considers a foreign ship unsafe, has it the right to detain it? The answers to
these questions, in so far as there are answers, are to be found in three conventions
on the law of the sea, referred to as UNCLOS I in 1958, UNCLOS II in 1960
and UNCLOS III in 1973.
In 1958 the United Nations called the first United Nations Law of the Sea
Conference (UNCLOS I). Eighty-six states attended. The aim was to define the

429
fundamental issues of the ownership of the sea, the right of passage through it and
the ownership of the sea bed. The latter issue has become increasingly important
with the growing interest in offshore oil resources. Four conventions were eventually
finalized, dealing with the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone, the High Seas,
the Continental Shelf and Conservation of Fisheries.
A second conference, UNCLOS II, was called in 1960 to follow up on some items
not agreed in UNCLOS I. In the 1960s the growing awareness of the mineral wealth
on the sea bed placed new significance on the law of the sea and in 1970 the United
Nations convened a third conference to produce a comprehensive Convention on the
Law of the Sea. Work started in 1973 (UNCLOS III), attended by 150 states. With so
many participants, discussion was extended. It was not until 1982 that the UN Convention
on the Law of the Sea 1982 was finally adopted, to enter into force twelve months
after it had been ratified by sixty states. It finally came into force on 16 November
1994, at last providing a ‘comprehensive framework for the regulation of all ocean
space…the limits of national jurisdiction over ocean space, access to the seas,
navigation, protection and preservation of the marine environment’.8
As far as the flag of registration is concerned the 1982 Convention endorses the
right of any state to register ships, provided there is a ‘genuine link’ between the
ship and the state.
FIGURE 12.1 Maritime zones
Source Martin Stopford, 1997
THE LAW OF THE SEA

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
430
BOX 12.1 Maritime zones recognized by the UN Convention on the Law of the
Sea, 1982
The territorial sea
This is the strip of water closest to the shore. The 1982 Convention recognizes a maximum
width of 12 nautical miles, but in practice countries use many different limits. Three miles is
the smallest limit, 12 miles the most common, while 200 miles is the furthest. Ships have the
right of innocent passage through territorial waters. Coastal states only have the right to
enforce their own laws relating to specific topics listed in Article 21 such as safe navigation
and pollution. They are entitled to enforce international laws.
The contiguous zone
This is a strip of water to the seaward of the territorial sea. It has its origins in the eighteenth
century ‘Hovering Acts’ enacted by Great Britain against foreign smuggling ships hovering
within distances of up to eight leagues (i.e. twenty-four miles) from the shore. Coastal states
have limited powers to enforce customs, fiscal, sanitary and immigration laws.
The exclusive economic zone (EEZ)
The EEZ is a belt of sea extending up to 200 miles from the baseline (i.e. the legally defined
shoreline). It is mainly concerned with the ownership of economic resources such as fisheries
and minerals. Within this zone third parties enjoy freedom of navigation and the laying of
cables and pipelines. From a shipping viewpoint the EEZ is more like the high seas. However,
the exception concerns pollution. Article 56 confers on the coastal state ‘jurisdiction as
provided for in the relevant provisions of this convention with regard to the protection and
preservation of the marine environment’. The ‘relevant provisions’ relate to the dumping of
waste and other forms of pollution from vessels. This gives the coastal state the right to enforce
oil pollution regulations in the EEZ, a matter of major economic importance for shipowners.
The high seas
The high seas are ‘all parts of the sea that are not included in the exclusive economic zone,
in the territorial sea or the internal waters of a state’. In this area vessels flying a particular
flag may proceed without interference from other vessels. This convention establishes the
basis on which nationality can be granted to a merchant ship and the legal status of that ship.
Article 91 of the 1982 Convention on the High Seas states that:    
Each state shall fix the conditions for the grant of its nationality to ships, for the registra-
tion of ships in its territory, and for the right to fly its flag. Ships have the nationality of the
state whose flag they are entitled to fly. There must exist a genuine link between the state
and the ship.
This paragraph was unchanged from the 1958 Convention and was the end-product of a
heated debate about whether countries such as Liberia and Panama had the right to estab-
lish open registries. Since the Convention does not define what constitutes a ‘genuine link’
between state and ship, it was left to each state to define this link for itself.

431
Since the flag state can define the nature of this link, in
practice it can register any ship it chooses. Once
registered, the ship becomes part of the state for legal
purposes. The ‘flag state’ has primary legal responsibility
for the ship in terms of regulating safety, labour laws
and on commercial matters. However the ‘coastal state’
also has limited legal rights over any ship sailing in its
waters.
The rights of the coastal states are defined by dividing
the sea into the ‘zones’ shown in Figure 12.1, each of
which is treated differently from a legal point of view.
The territorial sea (the strip closest to land), the
contiguous zone and the exclusive economic zone. The
fourth zone is the high seas which nobody owns. None
of the zones are precisely defined. Although the 1982
Convention fixes the limit to the territorial sea at 12
miles, Table 12.2 shows that many different limits are
in use. The most common is 12 miles, but a few countries
have adopted much more extensive limits. The
contiguous zone and the exclusive economic zone are
mainly of interest to shipowners because pollution control
and prevention rights are granted to the coastal states in
these areas. These zones are briefly defined in Box 12.1.
12.5 The regulatory role of the flag state
Economic implications of flag state regulation
In no area of maritime law has there been greater interplay between economics
and regulation than flag state issue. When a ship is registered in a particular country
(the ‘flag state’), the ship and its owner become subject to the laws of that state.
Registration makes the ship an extension of national territory while it is at sea. It
also qualifies for its protection. Because of the interdependence between legal
regulation and ship operating economics, the choice of register has become a
major issue for shipowners, as has the drive to extend and tighten the control
imposed by maritime law on shipping operations through international conventions.
There are four principal consequences of choosing to register in one state rather
than another:
1  Tax, company law and financial law. A company that has registered a ship in
a particular country becomes subject to that country’s commercial laws. These
laws will determine the company’s liability to pay tax and may impose
regulations in such areas as company organization, auditing of accounts,
employment of staff and limitation of liability. All of these affect the economics
of the business.
TABLE 12.2 Limits of
territorial sea
Source: Churchill and Lowe,
(1983), Appendix
THE REGULATORY ROLE OF THE FLAG STATE

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
432
2  Compliance with maritime safety conventions. The ship is subject to any safety
regulations laid down for the construction and operation of ships. Registration
under a flag state that has ratified the 1974 Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS)
Convention and rigidly enforces it leaves the shipowner with no choice but to
maintain high standards in the operation of his vessel. Conversely, registration
under a flag state that has not ratified SOLAS, or does not have the means to
enforce it, may allow shipowners to cut corners, thereby saving on equipment
and maintenance.
3  Crewing and terms of employment. The company is subject to flag state
regulations concerning the selection of crew and their terms of employment.
Some flag states, for example, insist on the employment of nationals.
4  Naval protection. The oldest reason for adopting a flag was to benefit from
the protection of the flag state. Although less important today, there were
examples during the war between Iran and Iraq in the 1980s when shipowners
changed to the US flag to gain the protection of US naval forces in the Gulf.
Any of these factors may be sufficient to motivate shipowners to seek a commercial
advantage by changing their flag of registry. Table 12.3 shows that this has a long
history, and one that has gathered momentum during the twentieth century as
taxation and regulation have come to play an increasing part in the shipowner’s
commercial operations. This naturally raises the question, ‘Is a shipowner free to
change his flag?’ To answer this question we need to look briefly into the procedure
by which ships are registered. In some countries the shipowner is subject to the
same legal regime as any other business, while in others special legislation is
introduced covering merchant shipping companies.
Registration procedures
If a ship is to trade freely into the major ports of the world without encountering
overwhelming difficulties with the authorities, it must have a nationality to identify
it for legal and commercial purposes. That nationality is obtained by registering
the ship. The way registration works varies from one country to another, but the
British regime may be taken as an illustration.
Under the Merchant Shipping Act 1894, British ships must be registered within
Her Majesty’s dominions (in practice, because of the constraints presented by the
legislation of UK Dependent Territories, that registration may have to be in the
UK). A peculiarity of British registration is that the ship is divided into sixty-four
shares. For the purposes of registration, thirty-three of these shares must be owned
by a British subject or by a company established under the law of some part of Her
Majesty’s dominions and having its principal place of business in those dominions.9
Because, under the UK Companies Acts, any person of any nationality may register
and own a company in the United Kingdom, it follows that a national of any
country may own a British ship.
Interestingly, there are no legal penalties for failing to register a ship in this
way, possibly because it was felt that the practical penalties are such that no legal
enforcement is required to provide an additional inducement. A ship thus registered

433
within Her Majesty’s dominions becomes eligible to fly the British flag, i.e. the
Red Ensign, although it is not obliged to do so. Nor is there any legal constraint on
a British subject or British companies registering ships outside Her Majesty’s
dominions if they wish to do so. All that is necessary is for the requirements of the
recipient register to be met.
TABLE 12.3 History of open registry
Source: Cooper (1986)
THE REGULATORY ROLE OF THE FLAG STATE

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
434
There is much variation in the requirements for registration. Some flag states
require the ship to be owned by a national. This is the case in Liberia, but the
requirement is easily met by setting up a Liberian company which qualifies as a
national for the purposes of registration. Panama has no nationality requirements,
while the Greek flag falls somewhere between the two, requiring 50 per cent
ownership by Greek citizens or legal entities.10
Types of registry
Ship registers can be broadly divided into two groups—national registers and
open registers.
•  National registers treat the shipping company in the same way as any other
business in the country. Certain special incentives or subsidies may be available
but, broadly speaking, the shipping company is subject to the full range of
national legislation covering financial, company and employment regulations.
•  Open registers have been set up with the specific aim of offering shipowners a
registration service, often as a means of earning revenue for the flag state. The
terms and conditions offered by open registers vary considerably, depending
upon the policy of the country concerned. Some are highly professional and
enforce international conventions on safety, while others are less vigilant,
allowing shipowners to cut corners. However, all aim to offer terms that are
favourable to an international shipowner.
The distinction here is one of policy rather than access to the flag. Most national
registers are open to any shipowner, whatever his nationality, who wishes to apply
for registration and satisfies the necessary conditions. For example, the United
Kingdom is open to any Greek, Norwegian or Danish shipowner who wishes to
register his vessels under the UK flag, provided he satisfies certain requirements.
In this chapter we are concerned with open registers, because these are the ones
whose policy is to develop a regulatory regime which is explicitly designed to
attract shipowners. Confronted with a choice of flags under which he can register
his ship, the shipowner must weigh up the relative advantages and disadvantages
of each of the alternatives.
The economic role of open registers
The movement towards open registers started in the 1920s, when US shipowners
saw registration under the Panamanian flag as a means of avoiding the high tax
rates in the United States, while at the same time registering in a country within
the stable political orbit of the United States. There was a spate of registrations
during this period, but the real growth came after the Second World War when the
US government sold off Liberty ships to US owners. Anxious to avoid operation
under the American flag, US tax lawyers approached Liberia to set up an
advantageous regime for ship registration, and the registration conditions in Liberia
were developed specifically to attract shipowners to register under that flag on the

435
payment of an annual fee.11 Shortly afterwards, Panama adapted its laws to attract
shipowners from anywhere in the world, and thus the two major international
open registers were established.
The use of an open register generally involves payment of an initial registration
fee and an annual ‘tonnage tax’, which enables the register to cover its costs and
make a profit. In return, the register offers regulations designed to suit a legal and
commercial environment specially designed to suit a shipowner trading
internationally. There are major differences in the way registers approach this
task, but in general the areas addressed are:
•  Tax. There are generally no taxes on profits or fiscal controls. The only tax is
the subscription tax per net registered ton.
•  Crewing. The shipping company has complete freedom to recruit internationally.
There is no requirement to employ high-wage nationals, as either officers or
crew. However, regulations regarding crew standards and training may be
enforced, depending on the policy of the register.
•  Company law. As a rule, the shipping company is given considerable freedom
over its corporate activities. For example, ownership of the stock in the company
need not be disclosed; shares are often in ‘bearer’ form, which means that they
belong to the person who holds them; liability can be limited to a one-ship
company; and the company is not required to produce audited accounts. There
are generally few regulations regarding the appointment of directors and the
administration of business.
FIGURE 12.2 World merchant fleet by flag
Source: Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
THE REGULATORY ROLE OF THE FLAG STATE

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
436
•  Safety standards. International open registers differ in the way they enforce
safety standards for the ships on the register. Some enforce high standards,
while others leave safety entirely to the shipowner.
In effect open registers are businesses. Like any business, the service offered is a
matter of policies reflected in the register’s maritime laws and the way it enforces
them. Supervising safety standards is expensive and during the 1980s recession
some open registers paid little attention to this aspect of the business. This proved
a difficult stance to maintain. To be successful an open register must ensure that
the ships flying its flag are acceptable in the ports of the world. As the scrutiny of
ships by shippers and port authorities has increased it has become more important
that the open register flags are acceptable. Thus open registries such as Liberia
offer shipowners freedom in the areas of taxation and company law, but enforce
legislation regarding the operational safety of ships registered under the Liberian
flag.
Figure 12.2 shows that by the late 1950s the Panamanian and Liberian fleets
had reached 16 million grt and international open registers were becoming a major
issue for the established shipping states. Inevitably the question was raised: ‘Has a
country such as Liberia the right to offer registry to a shipowner who is not a
national of that country?’ As we have already seen, this issue was discussed at the
first United Nations Law of the Sea Conference (UNCLOS I), which was held in
1958.
The issue was formally put to the test in 1959 when the first assembly of the
newly formed Inter-governmental Maritime Consultative Organization (IMCO)
met in London and elected its Maritime Safety Committee (MSC). The terms of
the election of the MSC stated that eight members of the committee should be the
largest shipowning nations. Initially the eight nations elected were the United
States, the United Kingdom, Norway, Japan, Italy, the Netherlands, France and
West Germany. However, objections were raised that Liberia, which ranked third
in world tonnage, and Panama, which ranked eighth, should have been elected
instead of France and Germany.
The dispute was finally submitted to the International Court of Justice for an
opinion on whether the election was legal in terms of the 1948 Convention that
established IMCO.12 It was argued by the European shipowners that for a ship to
register in a country there had to be a ‘genuine link’ between registration and
ownership, and that in the case of international open registry flags this link did not
exist. Predictably Liberia, Panama, India and the USA took the opposite view.
The European argument was not accepted by the international court and by a 9 to
5 vote the court held that, by not electing Liberia and Panama to the MSC, the
IMCO assembly had failed to comply with Article 28(a) of the 1948 Convention.
As a result, international open registry flags were legitimized in international law.
Shipping is particularly well suited to offshore registration and once this facility
became available it was widely adopted. Today about half the world merchant
fleet is registered under open registers. The principal open registry flags, Liberia,
Panama, Cyprus, Bahamas, Malta, Bermuda, and Vanuatu are listed in Table 12.4
which also shows the tonnage registered under these flags. The fact that virtually
no domestic shipowners use the flags confirms their status as open registries (see

437
Table 12.4, column 3). The exceptions are the two registries set up by Scandinavian
governments, the Norwegain International Ship Registry (NIS) and the Danish
International Registry. These were set up to provide a national alternative for
domestic shipowners and are extensively used in this way. There is a stark contrast
between the open registries, which have few nationals using their flag, and the
national registers shown at the bottom of Table 12.4 where most of the tonnage
registered belongs to domestic shipowners.
TABLE 12.4 World merchant fleet by ownership and registration, December 1995
(gross tonnage)
Source: United Nations Review of Maritime Transport, 1995
* Data taken from Table 12, p. 26 of source
** Data taken from Table 10, p. 23 of source, excepting ‘Total tonnage registered in the country’
figures which were taken from Annex III(b), p. 143
THE REGULATORY ROLE OF THE FLAG STATE

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
438
All the major shipping nations make use of open registers, though the practice
varies considerably. Despite the attractions of open registry, many shipowners in
Greece, Japan, and the United States continue to register under their domestic flag
(Table 12.4). Because the use of open registers gives shipowners greater freedom
in their crewing arrangements, the system has been opposed by the seamen’s unions,
particularly the International Transport Workers’ Federation (ITF). The ITF
produces a recommended wage scale and issues a blue card to the master of ships
employing crews paid on this scale. If the master cannot produce the blue card, the
unions may attempt to black the ship. This has been relatively successful in
persuading the owners of open registry flag vessels to observe pay scales. Although
open registry developed a mixed reputation in the 1980s, the commercial pressures
to ‘flag out’ have continued and many large shipping corporations eventually, and
often reluctantly, abandoned their national flag in favour of open registers. In
some cases the national flag responded to this trend by setting up its own open
register. Thus, in the 1990s open registers have, for the main part, fallen in line
with regulatory practice and this form of ownership has become accepted practice.
Dual registration
In some circumstances it is possible for a shipowner to register a ship under two
flags. The ship is first registered in country A. A bare boat charter is then granted
and this is registered in country B which accepts this structure for registration
purposes. This device may be used to circumvent certain restrictive regulations in
country A, for example crewing regulations.
Company structures associated with ship registration
The use of open registers in shipping has given rise to a distinctive structure of
company organization designed to protect the ‘beneficial owner’. A typical company
structure is shown in Figure 12.3. There are four active components:
1  The beneficial owner. The ultimate controlling owner who benefits from any
profits the ship makes. He may be located in his home country or an international
centre such as Geneva or Monaco.
2  One-ship company. A company, usually incorporated in an open registry
country, set up for the sole purpose of owning a single ship. It has no other
traceable assets. This protects the other assets of the beneficial owner from
claims involving the one ship company.13
3  Holding company Holding companies are often incorporated in a favourable
tax jurisdiction for the purpose of owning and operating ships. The only assets
of this company are the shares in each one-ship company. The shares in this
company are held by the beneficial owner, which could be a company or an
individual.
4  Management company. Day-to-day management of the ships is carried out by
another company established for this purpose. Usually this company is located
in a convenient shipping centre such as London or Hong Kong.

439
Beneficial ownership of the shipowning,
management and holding companies takes
the form of bearer shares. This device helps
to insulate the beneficial owners of the ships
from authorities seeking to establish tax and
other liabilities. Its use is not universal and
depends on the relative merits of the
domestic flag. If we take the twenty largest
shipowning nations, which are shown listed
in order of the size of their fleets in Figure
12.4, we find that the proportion of the fleet
registered under foreign flags in 1995 varies
considerably. Greece, the nation with the
biggest merchant fleet, had 58 per cent of
the tonnage registered abroad, leaving 42
per cent under the domestic flag. In contrast
Japan and the United States, both
exceptionally high cost flags, had almost
three-quarters of their fleets registered
abroad. Sweden and Saudi Arabia both had
over 80 per cent flagged out. Norway was
the exception with only 41 per cent flagged
FIGURE 12.3 Shipping company
structure
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
FIGURE 12.4 Principal merchant fleets using open-registry flags
Source: Review of Maritime Transport 1995, UNCTAD, Geneva, Table 10
THE REGULATORY ROLE OF THE FLAG STATE

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
440
out. The explanation is that in 1987 the Norwegian government, concerned about
the trend towards flagging out, set up the Norwegian International Ship Register
(NIS). This gave Norwegian owners most of the benefits they would receive under
an international flag.
12.6 How maritime laws are made
The need for standardization
We need to look in more detail at the procedures by which countries develop their
maritime law, and in particular the system of international maritime conventions.
Because ships trade internationally, there is a strong incentive to standardize those
aspects of national maritime law that relate to the international operation of ships.
In the nineteenth century, British law was used almost universally as the framework
for national maritime law and this provided a common base. More recently,
governments of maritime nations have taken more formal steps to standardize
maritime law. This is achieved by means of international ‘conventions’, which are
jointly drawn up between maritime states, setting out agreed objectives for legislation
on particular issues. Each country can, if it wishes, introduce the measures set out
in these conventions into its own national law. All nations that do this (known as
signatories to the convention) have the same law on the subject covered by the
convention.
British maritime low in the nineteenth century
Taking Britain as an example, in the mid-nineteenth century there were few
rules and regulations and virtually no construction or safety standards for
merchant ships. Many ships were sent to sea badly built, ill found, grossly
overloaded and often overinsured. These ‘coffin’ ships ‘frequently took their
unfortunate crews to the bottom of the oceans of the world’.14 As a result of
the agitation for reform from a member of Parliament called Samuel Plimsoll,
the ‘Plimsoll Act’ became law in 1876 and the Board of Trade was empowered,
as the responsible government department, to survey ships, pass them fit for
sea, and have them marked with a load line indicating the legal limit to which
they could be submerged.
In due course other laws were introduced as they became necessary, and Great
Britain built up a body of maritime law, which was specifically geared to tackling
the problems that arise when a nation state operates an extensive merchant shipping
fleet. Other countries developed their own laws on a piecemeal basis though,
because Britain dominated the maritime scene, it was common for countries with
a developing maritime interest to adopt British law as a basis for drafting their
own legislation. Thus, British rules and regulations came to apply much more
widely than in the United Kingdom.

441
International conventions for shipping
This approach was essentially ad hoc. The first step towards an international system
for drawing up internationally accepted regulations (conventions) came in 1889
when the United States government invited thirty-seven states to attend an
international maritime conference. On the agenda at this conference was a list of
problem areas in the maritime industry where it was felt that the standardization of
the international regulations would be an advantage. The agenda described in the
Protocol of Proceedings of the International Marine Conference (1889) included:
•  
rules for the prevention of collisions;
•  
regulations to determine the seaworthiness of vessels;
•  
draught to which vessels should be restricted when loaded;
•  
uniform regulations regarding the designation and marking of vessels;
•  
saving life and properties from shipwrecks;
•  
necessary qualifications for officers and seamen;
•  
lanes for steamers; and frequented routes;
•  
night signals for communicating information at sea;
•  
warnings of approaching storms;
•  
reporting, marking and removing dangerous wrecks and obstructions to
navigation;
•  
notice of dangers to navigation;
•  
the uniform system of buoys and beacons;
•  
the establishment of a permanent international maritime commission.15
In fact the conference succeeded in dealing with only the first item on the agenda,
but the full agenda neatly illustrates the areas that were thought to be important
and that were addressed by subsequent international conferences and conventions.
What is manifestly clear is that many of these impact upon shipping economics
and the opportunities for shipowners to reduce costs by ‘cutting corners’. This
conference set the pattern for the the present in which maritime laws are developed
by consensus.
Procedures for making maritime conventions
The building blocks of maritime law are ‘conventions’. Strictly speaking these are
not laws. They are internationally accepted ‘templates’ from which individual
nations can develop their own national maritime legislation. Whilst this does not
guarantee that every country will have exactly the same maritime law, it means
that most countries will have the same law on key issues. It also helps to avoid
badly thought out or inconsistent maritime legislation. The procedure for making
or changing a maritime convention involves four steps, which are broadly
summarized in Box 12.2.
An example of this process is provided by the Law of the Sea Convention 1982
discussed in section 12.4. The convention was instigated by UN General Assembly
resolution 2749. This resolution noted the ‘political and economic realities’ of the
HOW MARITIME LAWS ARE MADE

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
442
preceding decade and ‘the fact that many of the present State Members of the
United Nations did not take part in the previous United Nations Conferences on
the law of the sea’. It called for a new conference on the law of the sea. The
conference was convened in 1973 and discussions continued until 30 April 1982
when the draft convention was adopted by vote (130 in favour, 4 against, with 17
abstentions). The convention was opened for signature in Montego Bay, Jamaica
on 10 December 1982. On the first day signatures from 117 states were appended.
In addition one ratification was deposited.
For this process to work, a considerable investment of time and effort is required
in the organization of conferences, the drafting of conventions and subsequent
action to ensure that they remain up to date. In the case of shipping conventions
this service has devolved to three agencies of the United Nations—the International
Maritime Organization (IMO), the International Labour Organization (ILO) and
the Shipping Committee of UNCTAD. Each of these organizations deals with a
particular range of maritime affairs as detailed in the following sections.
The work of these three organizations is constantly evolving. Although in the
present context some of these conventions are of only passing interest, the key
issues of maritime safety, pollution control and conditions of employment strike at
the heart of ship operating economics. Further details of some of the more important
conventions are summarized at the end of the chapter.
BOX 12.2 Four steps in making a maritime convention
Step 1: Consultation and drafting conventions. The problem requiring legislation is identified
by interested governments. If there is enough support in an appropriate agency such as
the International Maritime Organization a convention is drafted by some suitably quali-
fied technical body (e.g. of IMO or ILO) defining in detail the regulations to be applied.
 
Step 2: Adoption of draft convention. The conference is then reconvened to consider the
draft convention and when agreement has been reached on the text, the convention is
adopted by the conference. The discussion at the conference serves the dual purpose of
showing whether or not there is a consensus that the regulations are required and
indicating what form the regulations should take.
    
Step 3: The convention is ‘opened for signature’ by the governments; this indicates their
intention to ratify the convention by making it legally binding in their own country.    
Step 4: Ratification. Each signatory country ratifies the convention by introducing it into its
own domestic legislation so that it becomes part of the law of the country or dominions. As
a rule, the convention comes into force only when a certain number of states have
completed this process—the precise terms and conditions will have been agreed as part
of the original adoption of the convention. Once the necessary conditions have been
met, the convention has the force of law in those countries that have ratified it. It does not
apply in countries where it has not been ratified and any legal cases must be tried under
the prevailing national law.

443
The conventions developed by these organizations are, in effect, statements of
objectives that are acceptable to a majority of the states that have convened to
discuss them. However, a state is not bound by the terms of a convention until it
has itself ratified it and ratification has been secured from a defined proportion of
the participants—usually two-thirds. Once a state has ratified a convention, and
the convention has itself become effective because it has secured the prescribed
number of ratifications or acceptances, all ratifying states have an obligation to
enact the necessary national legislation to give the convention effect. The convention,
when enacted in national law, provides the regime of constraint within which
shipowners are required to operate. The following sections review the basic
conventions on safety, pollution, conditions of seafarers’ employment, and the
UNCTAD Code of Conduct for Liner Companies.
12.7 The International Maritime Organization and its conventions
History and organization of IMO
The Inter-governmental Maritime Consultative Organization (IMCO) came into
operation in 1958, with responsibility for adopting legislation on matters relating
to maritime safety and pollution prevention on a world-wide basis and acting as
the custodian of a number of related international conventions. Subsequently, in
1982, IMCO changed its name to the International Maritime Organization (IMO).
It has been responsible for developing a large number of conventions, ranging
from the Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) to conventions on
tonnage measurement and oil pollution.
IMO has 155 member states and two associate members. Its main objective,
particularly in the early years, was to develop a comprehensive body of conventions,
codes and recommendations which could be implemented by member governments.
The most important conventions are now accepted by countries whose combined
merchant fleets represent 98 per cent of the world total. A list of its most important
conventions is shown in Table 12.5.
The governing body of IMO is the Assembly, which meets every two years. In
between Assembly sessions a Council, consisting of thirty-two member states elected
by the Assembly, acts as the governing body. The technical and legal work is
carried out by five committees:-
•
The Maritime Safety Committee (MSC) deals with a whole range of issues
concerning safety at sea. Sub-committees deal with a wide range of issues
which cover safety of navigation; radio communications and life-saving; search
and rescue; standards of training and watchkeeping; ship design and equipment;
life-saving appliances; fire protection; stability and load lines; fishing vessel
safety; carriage of dangerous goods, solid cargoes and containers; carriage of
bulk liquids and gases; and flag state implementation.
•
The Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) deals with all issues
relating to pollution, particularly oil.
THE INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION AND ITS CONVENTIONS

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
444
•
The Technical Co-operation Committee (TC) handles the technical co-operation
programme which is designed to help governments implement the technical
measures adopted by the organization.
•  The Legal Committee is responsible for considering any legal matters within
the scope of the organization.
•  The Facilitation Committee is concerned with easing the flow of international
maritime traffic by reducing the formalities and simplifying the documentation
required of ships when entering or leaving ports or terminals.
TABLE 12.5 Major IMO conventions relating to maritime safety and pollution
prevention for merchant shipping, as at March 1997
Source: International Maritime Organization (London)

445
To support these committees IMO has a secretariat of nearly 300 civil servants
located in London. Although in the early days the emphasis was on drafting
conventions, since the early 1980s the focus has changed. By that date IMO had
developed a comprehensive series of measures covering safety, pollution prevention,
liability and compensation. It was recognized that legislation is of little value
unless it is enforced so, in 1981, the Assembly adopted resolution A500(XII)
which redirected activity towards the effective implementation of the conventions.
This resolution was reaffirmed for the 1990s and ‘implementation’ has become
the major objective of IMO.16 To promote the task the MSC established the
subcommittee on Flag State implementation.
The coverage of the conventions are briefly described in the following
paragraphs.
The safety of life at sea convention (solas)
The first conference organized by IMO in 1960 adopted the International Convention
for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1960, which came into force in 1965 and covered a
wide range of measures designed to improve the safety of shipping. The provisions
of the convention cover: the design and stability of passenger and cargo ships;
machinery and electrical installations; fire protection; life-saving appliances; radio
communications; navigational safety; and the carriage of dangerous goods. SOLAS
was updated in 1974 and now incorporates an amendment procedure whereby the
convention can be updated to take account of changes in the shipping environment
without the major procedure of calling a conference. The 1974 SOLAS Convention
entered into force on 25 May 1980 and at 31 December 1996 had been ratified by
132 states. A protocol relating to the Convention in 1978 entered into force on 1
May 1981.
With the growing recognition that loss of life at sea and environmental pollution
are influenced by the way companies manage their fleets, in the 1990s IMO took
steps to regulate the standards of management in the shipping industry. At the
SOLAS Conference held in May 1994, the International Safety Management (ISM)
Code was formally incorporated in chapter IX of the SOLAS Regulations. The
Code requires shipping companies to develop, implement and maintain a Safety
Management System (SMS) which includes:
1  A company safety and environmental protection policy.
2  Written procedures to ensure safe operation of ships and protection of the
environment.
3  Defined levels of authority and lines of communication between, and among,
shore and shipboard personnel.
4  Procedures for reporting accidents and non-conformities (i.e. errors which
occur).
5  Procedures to prepare for and respond to emergency situations.
6  Procedures for internal audits.
THE INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION AND ITS CONVENTIONS

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
446
The ISM Code becomes mandatory for passenger ships and cargo ships over 500
gross tons on 1 July 1998, by which time 30,000 ships and 7,000 shipping
companies are required to comply. In the past safety regulations have tended to
focus on the physical rather than the managerial aspects of the shipping business,
so the ISM Code represents a new direction in maritime regulation. Inevitably it
raises many new problems over implementation and policing of such a complex
system.
Collision avoidance at sea
One of the most common causes of accidents at sea is collisions. Measures to
prevent these occurring were included in an Annex to the 1960 Safety of Life at
Sea Convention, but in 1972 IMO adopted the Convention on the International
Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972. Included in this convention
were regulations to introduce traffic separation schemes in congested parts of the
world. By 31 December 1996 the convention, which was amended in 1981, had
been ratified by 128 states. These ‘rules of the road’ have substantially reduced the
number of collisions between ships17.
Ships’ load lines
The problem of dangerously overloading ships encountered in the nineteenth century
was referred to earlier in the chapter. In 1930 an International Convention on Load
Lines was adopted, setting out standard load lines for different types of vessels
under different conditions. A new updated convention was adopted in 1966. The
International Convention on Load Lines, 1966 came into force in 1968 and by the
end of 1996 had been ratified by 139 states.
Convention on tonnage measurement of ships, 1969
Although this might seem an obscure subject for an international convention, it is
one of great interest to shipowners because ports, canals and other organizations
fix their charges on the basis of the ship’s tonnage. This created an incentive to
manipulate the design of ships in such a way as to reduce the ship’s tonnage while
still allowing it to carry the same amount of cargo. Occasionally this was at the
expense of the vessel’s stability and safety.
In 1969 the first International Convention on Tonnage Measurement was adopted.
It proved to be so complex and so controversial that it required twenty-five states
with not less than 65 per cent of the world’s gross merchant tonnage to ratify it
before it became law. The required number of acceptances was not achieved until
1980 and the Convention came into force in 1982. The convention establishes new
procedures for computing the gross and net tonnages of a vessel. At the end of
1996 116 states had ratified it.

447
Convention on standards of training, certification and
watchkeeping for seafarers (STCW), 1978
The aim of this convention was to introduce internationally acceptable minimum
standards for the training and certification of officers and crew members. It came
into force in 1984 and by the end of 1996 had been ratified by 120 states.
Amendments in 1995 sought to complement the ISM Code initiative by establishing
verifiable standards, structured training, and shipboard familiarization.
Convention for the prevention of pollution from ships (MARPOL)
With the development of bulk shipping and the carriage of very large quantities of
toxic materials by sea, marine pollution has increasingly become the subject of
international regulations. The process of developing legislation started with a
conference held in London in 1952, and this led to the 1954 Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil (OILPOL). The problem addressed by
the convention was that, when oil tankers carry ballast water in their cargo tanks
that they then discharge to reload cargo, it inevitably contains a certain amount of
crude oil, which pollutes the sea. The convention established ‘prohibited zones’
extending at least 50 miles from the nearest land. These regulations were
progressively updated during the next 20 years.
As the pressure on the marine environment increased during the 1960s, the need
was seen for a more broadly based convention on marine pollution, and in 1973 the
International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL)
was adopted. This convention deals with all forms of marine pollution except the
disposal of land-generated waste. It covers such matters as: the definition of violation;
certificates and special rules on the inspection of ships; enforcement; and reports on
incidents involving harmful substances. For example, tankers must be fitted with oil
discharge and monitoring equipment, and they must have slop tanks. New oil tankers
of over 70,000 dwt must be provided with segregated ballast tanks of sufficient
capacity to enable them to operate on ballast voyages without using oil tanks for
water ballast except in very severe weather conditions. At the next international
conference on tanker safety and pollution prevention in 1978 additional measures
were added in the form of a protocol to the 1973 convention. The lower limit for
tankers to be fitted with segregated ballast tanks was reduced from 70,000 dwt to
20,000 dwt and existing tankers were required to fit crude oil washing equipment.
In the early 1990s attention turned to measures to reduce the spillage of oil in
the event of a tanker collision or grounding. Annex I to MARPOL (73/78) included
two regulations, adopted on 1 July 1992, concerning the construction standards
for new tankers (Regulation 13F) and upgrading the safety standards of existing
tankers (Regulation 13G).
Regulation 13F deals with the design of new ships. Tankers ordered after 6 July
1993 are required to have a double hull or an equivalent, though unspecified,
design. Attention is given to the precise design of the double hull, particularly the
requirement that vessels over 30,000 dwt must have a two-metre space between
the cargo tanks and the hull. Regulation 13G was even more controversial because
THE INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION AND ITS CONVENTIONS

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
448
it deals with existing ships. As adopted, Regulation 13G creates two age ‘hurdles’
for tankers. At 25 years tankers must allocate 30 per cent of the side or the bottom
area of the vessel to cargo-free tanks. This is a defensive measure against oil spills.
At 30 years of age all tankers must comply with Regulation 13 F and fit a double
hull.
The international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships as
modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto has been ratified by 97 states.
12.8 The International Labour Organization
The ILO is one of the oldest inter-governmental agencies now operating under the
United Nations. It was originally set up in 1919. Its principal interest is in maritime
labour problems and in this context it has been involved in developing a broad
range of conventions dealing with working conditions on board ocean-going ships.
These include provisions on manning, hours of work, pensions, vacation, sick pay
and minimum wages. Since crewing costs account for a high proportion of total
ship operating costs, the work of the ILO is of considerable importance in ship
operating economics.
The terms and conditions of employment for seafarers have a direct impact
upon ship operating economics. Since the 1920s the regulatory framework within
which shipowners must operate has steadily expanded. Between 1920 and 1981 a
total of thirty-two maritime labour conventions concerning seafarers were adopted,
in addition to twenty-five maritime labour recommendations. A list of the
conventions is shown in Table 12.6 along with the number of ratifications. The
coverage of the conventions is briefly described in the following paragraphs.
Convention concerning minimum standards in merchant ships
(1976)
This important convention, which came into force in November 1981, requires
countries that ratify it to have laws or regulations laying down, for ships registered
in their territory:
1  Safety standards including standards of competency, hours of work and
manning, so as to ensure safety of life on board ship.
2  Social security measures.
3  Shipboard conditions of employment and shipboard living arrangements.
These laws and regulations must broadly conform to the standards set out in other
ILO conventions. Countries that ratify the convention are also required: to set up
the necessary machinery to ensure that the national laws or regulations dealing
with these topics are adequately enforced; to ensure that seafarers are properly
qualified or trained; to verify by inspection that ships comply with the international
labour conventions that it has ratified; and to hold an official enquiry into any
serious marine casualty involving ships registered in its territories. This convention
has been ratified by most of the major flags, including Norway, France, West
Germany, Greece, Italy, Liberia, Spain and the United Kingdom.

449
TABLE 12.6 Major ILO conventions relating to working and living conditions
at sea
Source: International Labour Office, Chart of Ratifications of International Labour Conventions
(Geneva, 1993).
* Conventions that have not yet received the required number of ratifications for entry into force.
** Conventions which did not receive the requisite number of ratifications.
† Conventions which are closed to ratification.
THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
450
General conditions of employment
There are four conventions under this heading: Wages, Hours of Work and Manning
(Sea); Paid Vacations (Seafarers), 1949; Repatriation of Seamen, 1926; and Seafarers
Annual Leave with Pay, 1976. These controversial conventions deal with such key
issues as minimum wage rates, hours of work on board ship, the circumstances
under which seamen are entitled to repatriation expenses and the minimum
entitlement to annual leave. The Convention on Wages, Hours of Work and Manning
has not received sufficient ratifications to come into force.
Safety, health and welfare
The three principal conventions under this heading are: Food and Catering (Ships’
Crews), 1946; Crew Accommodation on Board Ship (Supplementary Provisions),
1970; and the Prevention of Occupational Accidents to Seafarers, 1970. The first
deals with regulations for ensuring that there are adequate catering facilities on
board ship and that sufficient supplies of food and water are made available. The
convention on crew accommodation (not in force) sets out minimum standards for
sleeping accommodation, mess rooms and the provision of services, lighting and
recreation facilities. In the same vein, the convention on the prevention of accidents
requires minimum safety standards for the ship, its equipment and machinery,
backed up by procedures for inspection, enforcement and the collection of statistics
about accidents.
Conditions for admission to employment
Under this heading there are five conventions dealing with the minimum age for
employment on board a ship (15 years) and the requirement for employees to
produce a medical certificate attesting to their fitness for work.
Certificates of competency
The Officers’ Competency Certificates Convention, 1936, requires masters,
navigating officers, chief engineers and engineering officers to hold a certificate
of competency. The terms on which these certificates may be awarded are also
specified. The Certification of Ships’ Cooks Convention, 1946, requires the cook
to hold a certificate indicating that he has passed a practical test in the preparation
of meals. A third convention deals with the qualifications required by able seamen
(1946).
The extent to which conventions have been ratified varies widely between
countries. For example, France, Norway, Italy and Spain have all ratified more
than twenty ILO conventions, whereas the USA has ratified only four and Cyprus
only two.

451
12.9 UNCTAD conventions
The UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) was established in
1964. The Committee on Shipping is one of five standing committees of the
Conference; it has a professional staff. Since the mid-1960s it has been particularly
involved with the maritime interests of developing countries. The best known of
its conventions is the Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences.
During the 1960s the newly independent developing countries faced various
difficulties in establishing liner shipping operations. The struggle to develop an
international convention confirming their right to participate in the transportation
of their own trade became one of the major political issues of the 1960s and 1970s.
The issue was raised at the first UNCTAD conference in Geneva in 1964 and
the consultation debate was further developed at the second UNCTAD conference
in New Delhi in 1966. By 1972, when the third UNCTAD conference met at
Santiago de Chile, a draft Code of Conduct for the Liner Conference System was
issued to delegates and in the ensuing debate obtained almost total support from
the Group of 77, though it met with strong opposition from many of the developed
countries.
The vote was carried, the draft convention was approved and the UN General
Assembly requested the Secretary General of the United Nations to convene, under
the auspices of UNCTAD, a conference of plenipotentiaries18 to consider and adopt
a convention on a code of conduct for liner conferences. The conference was held
in two parts in late 1973 and early 1974, and the Convention on a Code of Conduct
for Liner Conferences was adopted by a vote of 72 to 7, with 5 abstentions. Details
of the convention can be found on p. 350.
The convention was opened for signature in New York from 1 July 1974 to 30
June 1975 and was to enter into force six months after the date on which not less
than twenty-four states with a combined tonnage of at least 25 per cent of the
world’s general cargo fleet had become contracting parties to it.19 These criteria
were met after the ratification of the convention by the Federal Republic of Germany
and the Netherlands as 57th and 58th contracting parties, altogether owning 28.7
per cent of the relevant tonnage, on 6 April 1983.20 Seventeen problems were
encountered by the EEC countries in ratifying this convention because in restricting
competition, it was held to be contrary to the Treaty of Rome.
Eventually a compromise was worked out known as the ‘Brussels Package’,
whereby EEC countries ratified the convention on the understanding that there
would be free competition in trade between EEC countries. In total this highly
controversial convention had taken almost 20 years.
The UNCTAD Convention on Conditions for Registration for Ships
In the early 1980s UNCTAD convened a conference on conditions for registration
of ships, attended by representatives from 109 states. Like other UNCTAD
conventions, this appears to have been motivated by the Group of 77 with the aim
of widening their maritime control. The final convention was agreed on 7 February
1986. Article I of the convention defines the objective as being to strengthen the
UNCTAD CONVENTIONS

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
452
genuine link between a state and ships flying its flag, in order to give more effective
control of the identification and accountability of shipowners and operators
especially in administrative, technical, economic and social matters.21
The convention defines the responsibility of the flag state to set up an adequate
national maritime administration to ensure that ships flying its flag comply with
the law (Article 5) and to ensure that the owner of the ship can be identified and
held accountable where necessary (Article 6). The convention also specifies the
information about the ship and its owner that should be entered in the state’s
national ship register (Article 11). Although it provides a formal statement of the
main issues concerning the registration of ships, it is not generally regarded as
having introduced any major changes in ship registration.
12.10 The regulatory role of the coastal states
Now we come to the ‘coastal states’ and the part they play in regulating merchant
shipping. As the wider use of flags of convenience has diluted the supervisory role
of the flag states, the coastal states have played an increasingly important part in
the regulatory system. The 1982 Law of the Sea Convention permits coastal states
to legislate for the ‘good conduct’ of ships in their territorial seas, but otherwise
not to interfere with them. The Convention lists eight specific areas in which
legislation is permitted. The main ones are safety of navigation; protection of
navigational aids; preservation of the environment and prevention, reduction and
control of pollution; and the prevention of infringement of customs and sanitary
laws, etc. From an economic viewpoint the two areas in which legislation has been
most significant are safety and pollution.
Port state control
As far as safety is concerned, the main vehicle is port state control. As we have
already seen the safety of ships is governed by the law of the flag state and the
Classification Societies. Article 21 of Law of the Sea specifically protects shipowners
from unilateral regulations by coastal states concerning the design and construction
of ships. It states that the legislation of coastal states ‘shall not apply to the design,
construction, manning or equipment of foreign ships, unless they are giving effect
to generally accepted international rules or standards’. This is intended to prevent
a ‘nightmare scenario’ in which ships are subject to different construction standards
in different territorial waters. However, it does endorse the coastal state’s right to
enforce international regulations in its territorial waters. This right has given rise
to the port state control movement under which some coastal states inspect ships
entering their ports and detain any which do not meet international standards for
construction, maintenance and safety equipment.
The US Oil Pollution Act 1990
Pollution is the other area in which coastal states are very active. One of the most
forthright initiatives in recent years is the US Oil Pollution Act (1990). This

453
legislation was formulated in response to the public concern caused by the grounding
of the Exxon Valdez in the Prince William Sound, Alaska in March 1989.
The Act applies to oil spills in US inland waters; up to three miles off shore;
and the ‘exclusive economic zone’ up to 200 miles to sea from the shoreline. The
LOOP Terminal is not included. It lays down wide ranging regulations for the
handling of oil spills. The ‘responsible party’ is defined as the owner or operator
of the tanker. The responsible party is required to pay for the clean-up, up to a
liability limit of $10 million, or $1,200 per gross ton, whichever is the greater.
However, if there has been gross negligence these limits do not apply.
In addition to making shipowners responsible for the cost of pollution incidents,
the Act laid down specific requirements for ships operating in US waters. These
include requirements that ships should carry a certificate of financial responsibility,
demonstrating that they have sufficient financial means to pay a claim. There is
also a requirement that vessels ordered after 30 June 1990 or delivered after 1
January 1994 should have double-hulls and a schedule for phasing out single hull
tankers by 2010. The coastguard is required to evaluate the manning standards of
foreign vessels and to ensure that these are at least equivalent to US law. All
tankers are required to carry a contingency plan for responding to an oil spill.
This legislation, particularly the requirement for double-hulled tankers, caused
great controversy. However, the effect was to focus the attention of the shipping
community far more rigorously on the risks associated with oil pollution. In particular,
for the first time, shipowners were faced with the possibility of unlimited liability
for the cost of any oil spill they are involved in. The high cost of cleaning up after
the Exxon Valdez spill put a financial dimension on the possible scale of this problem.
12.11 Summary
In this chapter we have moved outside the conventional framework of market
economics to examine the regulatory system that has played such a vital part in the
shipping industry over the last 20 or 30 years. We started by identifying three
regulatory regimes which operate in the shipping industry, the Classification
Societies, the flag states and the coastal states.
The Classification Societies are the shipping industry’s internal regulatory system.
The mainstay of their authority is the Class Certificate which is issued when the
ship is built and updated by means of regular surveys throughout the life of the
ship. Without a Class Certificate a ship cannot obtain insurance and has little
commercial value.
Flag states make the laws which govern the commercial, and civil activities of the
merchant ship. Because different countries have different laws, the flag of registration
makes a difference. Registers can be subdivided into national registers, which treat
shipping companies in the same way as other national industries, and open registers
(flags of convenience) such as Liberia and Panama, which are set up with the specific
objective of earning revenue by offering commercially favourable terms of registration
as a service to shipowners. With the increasing globalization of the maritime industry,
open registers have become more prominent and half the world merchant fleet is now
registered under a foreign flag, which in practice usually means a flag of convenience.
SUMMARY

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF MARITIME ECONOMICS
454
Although each nation makes its own maritime laws, there are areas where it is
very advantageous if all countries have the same laws. On matters such as safe ship
design, collision avoidance, load lines, pollution, tonnage measurement and
certificates of competency it would be hopelessly impractical if each country had
different laws. Developing a standard framework of international law which avoids
this problem is achieved by means of international conventions. Maritime nations
meet to discuss a draft convention, which is finally agreed. Each country then
ratifies it and thereby undertakes to incorporate the terms of the convention into its
own national legislation. International conventions drawn up since the mid-1960s
cover a wide range of different subjects including the safety of life at sea, load
lines, crew training, tonnage measurement, terms and conditions of employment
of crew, oil pollution and the conduct of liner conferences. The three organizations
active in developing these conventions are IMO, ILO and the Shipping Committee
of UNCTAD.
Some countries do not ratify the conventions or allocate sufficient administrative
resources to enforcing them, leaving ‘loopholes’ in the system. Shipowners registered
in these countries are, in principle, able to operate outside the convention.
This brings us to the third form of regulation, the coastal state in whose waters
the ship is trading. The Law of the Sea permits coastal states to pass legislation
concerning the ‘good conduct’ of ships in its territorial waters. One important area
of legislation is pollution control, notably the US Oil Pollution Act 1990. In
addition there has been a recent trend towards ‘port state control’, whereby countries
enforce safety standards on the ships using their ports.
