455
Chapter 13
The economics of
shipbuilding and
scrapping
The shipbuilding industry is characterised by an extraordinary pattern
of switch-back production, moving from peak to trough and back to
peak again within a decade…if only a more stable level of output could
have been achieved, many of the problems in the industry, particularly
in labour relations could have been avoided.
(David Dougan, The Shipwrights)
Chapter 13

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
456
13.1 Role of the merchant shipbuilding and scrapping industries
The job of the shipbuilding industry is to supply new ships, while shipbreakers are the
last resort buyers of old ships when it is no longer possible to operate them profitably
in the shipping market. In terms of their economic structure, the two industries are
very different Shipbuilding is a heavy engineering business, selling a large and
sophisticated product built mainly in facilities located in the industrialized countries of
Japan, Europe, South Korea, China and Taiwan. It requires substantial capital investment
and a high level of technical expertise to design and produce a merchant ship. The ship
scrapping industry, in contrast, is located mainly in the developing countries of the
Indian subcontinent and is one of the world’s most labour-intensive industries—in
some countries ship scrapping takes place on the beach, with labour equipped with
only the most primitive of hand tools and cutting equipment.
In the first part of the chapter we will examine the regional distribution of
shipbuilding capacity in the 1980s and the relationship between the level of shipping
and shipbuilding activity. We then consider shipbuilding market economics, looking
in particular at the shipbuilding market cycle, the price mechanism and the
influences on the supply of and demand for shipbuilding output. The section on
shipbuilding ends with a discussion of competitiveness and the related issues of
capacity measurement, the production process and international comparisons of
productivity. The second part of the chapter discusses the process by which ships
are scrapped, the market for scrap products and the international structure of the
ship scrapping industry. Finally, in this chapter we introduce a new unit of
measurement, the compensated gross ton (cgt). The cgt of a ship is derived from
its gross tonnage (gt), but weighted to take account of the work content of that
particular ship type—detailed definitions can be found in Appendix 2.
13.2 Regional structure of world shipbuilding
Who builds the world’s merchant ships?
About thirty countries have a significant merchant shipbuilding industry (see Table
13.1). Their production fell from 27.5 m gt in 1977 to 13 m gt in 1980, then
increased to 22.45 m gt in 1995. This volatility was accompanied by a re-alignment
of regional shipbuilding capacity. Europe’s market share fell from 41 per cent to
17 per cent, while the Far East grew from 46 per cent to 75 per cent. Japan and
South Korea now dominate the industry, between them producing two-thirds of
the world’s ships. The other production is spread over many countries, mainly in
Eastern and Western Europe. The shipbuilding output of most European countries
declined during the 1980s, though only Sweden completely stopped building ships.
South Korea and China both grew rapidly despite the general market problems in
the shipbuilding industry.
Shipbuilding is a long cycle business. Ships take several years to deliver, and
once built they remain in service for 24 or 30 years. Since ships trickle in and out
of the merchant fleet at only a few per cent a year, the pace of change in shipbuilding
demand is slow. Trends develop over decades rather than years, and we need to

457
TABLE 13.1 Merchant ships completed during years 1977–95
Source: Lloyd’s Register of Shipping Annual Summaries
REGIONAL STRUCTURE OF WORLD SHIPBUILDING

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
458
step well back to see them. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the changing
regional location of shipbuilding activity shown vividly in Figure 13.1. A century
ago, shipbuilding was dominated by Great Britain. Gradually Continental Europe
and Scandinavia squeezed Britain’s share down to 40 per cent. Then in the 1950s
Japan overtook Europe, achieving a market share of 50 per cent in 1969.
FIGURE 13.1 Shipbuilding market shares
Source: Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
In the 1980s the South Korean industry grew rapidly, challenging Japan’s
dominant position and finally establishing the Far East as the centre of world
shipbuilding. In the 1990s China was increasing in importance. Following this
sequence of events we might ask what it is about shipbuilding that enables a single
country to obtain the commanding position achieved by Britain, Japan, and South
Korea and why the balance has changed so much over the years. To answer this
question it is instructive to take a brief look at the recent history of the shipbuilding
industry, and in particular the relationship between the shipping and shipbuilding
industries.1
The decline of British shipbuilding
In 1892–4 Britain produced over 80 per cent of the world total gross tonnage and
owned half the world fleet. In 1918 the Departmental Committee on Shipping and
Shipbuilding commented ‘there are few important industries where the
predominance of British manufacture has been more marked than shipbuilding

459
and marine engineering’.2 Britain held this dominant place in the shipbuilding
market until 1950 when, for a couple of years, it regained its 60 per cent market
share, but when we examine Figure 13.2 the downward trend is apparent, as is the
close correlation with the decline of the UK merchant fleet. At the beginning of
the twentieth century, the UK merchant fleet had a 45 per cent market share and
shipbuilding about 55 per cent.
It is not difficult to explain how British shipping achieved this dominant position.
Britain controlled massive trade flows. The Empire was at its height and the shipping
companies controlled major liner routes in the Atlantic and Pacific, particularly
between the Dominions. In the tramp shipping market, Britain—an island nation—
was the major importer of raw materials and foodstuffs such as grain, while the
export trade in manufactures and coal was equally prominent. As the control of
trade slipped away, so did shipping. With each world war the British Empire
diminished in size, the merchant marine was weakened by wartime losses and
trading partners became better able to carry their own trade.3 By 1960 the UK fleet
accounted for only 20 per cent of world tonnage and British shipbuilding for
about the same proportion of world shipbuilding output. Thirty years later the
market shares of both industries had fallen below 2 per cent.
One reason that has been put forward for the decline of British shipbuilding
was its failure to graduate from a production process based on manual skills to the
more closely integrated production technology4 that was developed in Sweden and
Japan during the twentieth century. It is, however, difficult to separate this effect
from the link between the fortunes of shipping and shipbuilding. Discussing the
rise of the British shipbuilding industry during the nineteenth century, Hobsbawm
argues strongly for the existence of this link in the following terms:
During the age of the traditional wooden sailing ship Britain had been a great,
but by no means unchallenged producer. Indeed her weight as a shipbuilder had
been due not to her technological superiority, for the French designed better
ships and the USA built better ones… British shipbuilders benefited rather
because of the vast weight of Britain as a shipping and trading power and the
preference of British shippers (even after the abrogation of the Navigation
Acts, which protected the industry heavily) for native ships.5
This link between trade, shipping and shipbuilding was crucial. In Britain a
relationship existed between shipowners and shipbuilders that went beyond normal
competitive ties. Many of the great British shipping lines had a longstanding
association with particular shipyards, which seems to have reinforced the tradition
of building at home. Even in the 1970s there were shipyards in Britain that built
exclusively for a single owner. As we shall see when we look at other regions, this
was not a uniquely British state of affairs. Despite the international nature of the
shipbuilding market and the absence of trade barriers such as tariffs and transport
costs, the concept of a home market seems to be very strongly established in the
shipbuilding industry. Even in the intensely competitive world of the 1990s,
shipbuilders are very dependent upon the fortunes of their home fleet.
REGIONAL STRUCTURE OF WORLD SHIPBUILDING

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
460
European shipbuilding 1902–94
In mainland Europe, shipbuilding went through much the same cycle of growth
and decline as the UK. No individual country achieved prominence in the
shipbuilding market on a scale comparable with Japan or Great Britain, but
European shipyards as a whole accounted for 20–40 per cent of shipbuilding output
during the first half of the twentieth century. The position is best analysed by
distinguishing the continental shipbuilders of West Germany, France, Belgium,
the Netherlands, Italy and Spain from those in Scandinavia.
During the period 1902–80, the six continental shipbuilding countries maintained
a market share of around 20 per cent, reaching 40 per cent in some years. This is
shown in Figure 13.2c along with the market share of their shipping fleets, which
was 5–10 per cent lower for most of the period after 1945. With the exception of
the immediate post-war years, the correlation between shipping and shipbuilding
is close. Between 1902 and 1939 the market share of continental shipbuilders
averaged around 23 per cent, while their merchant fleet accounted for approximately
23 per cent of world shipping. The decline of the shipping fleet in the 1960s and
1970s is mirrored by a decline in the market share of shipbuilding—by the mid-
1990s the market share of the continental yards had fallen below 10 per cent.
The experience of the Scandinavian shipbuilding industry is shown in Figure
13.2d. The main producers in this region are Denmark, Norway, Sweden and
Finland. Although none of these countries has sufficient population or heavy
industry to make them major participants in seaborne trade, they have a strong
maritime tradition. In this sense, the Scandinavian fleets may be regarded as part
of the international shipping industry, in much the same way as Greece. At the
start of the period in 1902 the Scandinavian shipbuilding industry had only a 3 per
cent market share, well below the 10 per cent share of the Scandinavian merchant
fleet. The reason why shipbuilding capacity lagged behind the merchant fleet
during this period appears to have been the difficulty that the Scandinavian
shipbuilding industry had in switching from wooden shipbuilding to the more
capital-intensive process of building steel ships. Petersen comments:
In the 1870s Norway had a large number of small shipyards employing expert
master carpenters and experienced workers. These men were able to build all the
sailing ships Norway needed, using only simple tools and home grown timber.
The building of steam ships, on the other hand, demanded the import of raw
materials and the erection of large shipyards with expensive, heavy machinery,
and cranes. Steamship building did not gain momentum until the 1890s.6
Shipbuilding output in Scandinavia remained nominal until the First World War,
when the industry started a rapid growth that eventually reached a peak market
share of 21 per cent in 1933. This position was maintained until the early 1970s
when a decline in the market share of the Scandinavian fleet coincided with a fall
in the market share of Scandinavian shipbuilding. The fall in the Scandinavian
fleet may be explained partly by the transfer of registration to flags of convenience
that occurred during this period; however, the decline in the shipbuilding market
share both here and in continental Europe undoubtedly reflects the growing
competitive strength of the Japanese industry.7

461
Source: Lloyd’s Register of Shipping, statistical tables
Note: The figure shows, for each region, the merchant fleet as a percentage of the world fleet, and
shipbuilding output as a percentage of world shipbuilding output.
FIGURE 13.2 The link between shipping and shipbuilding market shares by
region
REGIONAL STRUCTURE OF WORLD SHIPBUILDING

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
462
Merchant shipbuilding in the United States
Historically the US has played an unusual part in world shipbuilding. Apart from
a spell as the leading shipbuilder in the early nineteenth century, in peacetime the
US has not been particularly prominent in the international market as either a
merchant shipbuilder or a shipowner. Excluding the US reserve fleet, during the
period 1900–86 the United States had an average market share of only a few per
cent, as can be seen in Figure 13.2e. Of course the US had major shipping interests
but, as we saw in Chapter 12, US shipowners were among the first to use
international registries extensively. Yet during the two world wars the United States
demonstrated the ability, in a period of two or three years, to mount a massive
shipbuilding programme.
During the First World War, US shipbuilding output was increased from 200,000
grt in 1914 to 4 million grt in 1919—the United States alone produced 30 per cent
more ships in that year than the whole of world shipbuilding output before the
beginning of the First World War. Production on this scale was achieved by using
standard ships and standard production methods at the Hogg Island Complex,
which consisted of fifty building berths in five groups of ten along the Delaware
River. The complex built a standard merchant ship in three sizes constructed as far
as possible from flat plate. The building time was approximately 275 days. This
was the first step towards standardized shipbuilding practices, though construction
methods at these yards did not conform to the complete prefabricated unit principle
introduced later.
The Second World War saw an even more extensive shipbuilding programme for
the American Liberty ship, which was a standard dry cargo vessel of 10,902 dwt, and
the T2 tanker of 16,543 dwt. These ships were mass produced, with major sub-
assemblies constructed off the berths—a development made possible by the introduction
of welding in place of riveting. Production commenced in 1941 and reached a peak
in 1944 when a total of 19.3 million grt of new ships were launched in the United
States—almost ten times the total world shipbuilding output in 1939. A total of
2,600 Liberty ships were built and 563 T2 tankers. After the war some of the Liberty
ships were sold to private operators and others were traded, but eventually about
1,400 were laid up as part of the US reserve fleet, since their slow speed of 11 knots
and full-bodied design made them uneconomical in commercial operation.
The activities of the US merchant shipbuilding industry during the twentieth
century raises two interesting observations. The first is the speed with which a
major shipbuilding programme can be set up and dismantled, given sufficient
urgency. On two occasions the US industry demonstrated the ability within a
period of two years to develop a massive shipbuilding capacity and dismantle it
again within an equally short period. The second point is that, despite the obvious
efficiency of the US shipbuilding industry, it could not compete commercially in
the world shipbuilding market. In the 1930s, and again during the post-war era,
the US government provided construction subsidies to US merchant shipbuilders
to offset the difference between the construction in American and foreign yards.
At different times the levels of subsidy varied from 30 per cent to 50 per cent of
the cost of construction.8 We find a similar pattern in Sweden, which was generally

463
considered during the 1970s to have the highest productivity of any shipbuilding
country, but also incurred the highest level of subsidies.
The Japanese shipbuilding
The rise of Japan as a dominant force in the world shipbuilding market provides a
rather different example of the link between shipbuilding and the general level of
maritime activity. Like Britain, Japan is an island nation and the growth of the
economy after the Second World War made intense demands on seaborne transport.
Initially the development of the Japanese shipbuilding industry drew strength from
a co-ordinated shipping and shipbuilding programme. For example, Trezise and
Suzuki comment:
In the early post war period…the industries selected for intensive governmental
attention included the merchant shipping industry. A planned shipbuilding
programme for the merchant fleet was instituted during the occupation, in 1947,
and is still being pursued essentially along the lines laid down at this time. Each
year the government—that is to say the Ministry of Transport—in consultation
with its industry advisors in Shipping and Shipbuilding Rationalisation Council—
decides on the tonnage of ships to be built, by type (tankers, ore carriers, liners,
and so on) and allocates production contracts and the ships among the applicant
domestic shipbuilders and shipowners. The selected shipping lines receive
preferential financing and in turn are subject to close government supervision.9
During the period 1951–72, 31.5 per cent of the total loans made by the Japan
Development Bank were for marine transportation. This domestic shipbuilding
programme undoubtedly contributed to the success of the Japanese shipbuilding
industry, but the Japanese merchant marine never achieved the degree of market
domination that the British merchant fleet had established in the nineteenth and
early twentieth century. Figure 13.2b shows that, although the market share of the
Japanese fleet increased from 1 per cent in 1948 to 10 per cent in 1984, this fell
well short of the 50 per cent market share achieved by Japanese shipbuilders.
There are two explanations for this. One is that the Japanese flag was
uncompetitive and many of the ships commissioned for the carriage of Japanese
trade were purchased by international owners in Hong Kong or Greece and
registered under flags of convenience. In 1995 73 per cent of the Japanese-owned
fleet was operating under foreign flags (see Figure 12.4), so the shipping market
share in Figure 13.2b is misleadingly low. The second is that the Japanese
shipbuilding industry became highly competitive and obtained a high penetration
of the export market, particularly the market for large tankers sold to independent
owners.
The strategy followed by the Japanese in developing their shipbuilding industry
was similar to their approach in other major industries—building large modern
shipyards and using the domestic market as the volume baseload for selling highly
competitively into the export market. There was heavy investment in new facilities,
particularly in large modern shipyards with building docks capable of mass producing
REGIONAL STRUCTURE OF WORLD SHIPBUILDING

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
464
VLCCs and large bulk carriers at a rate of five or six vessels per annum. Some
shipyards were built in the main industrial centres—for example the Mitsui Shipyard
at Chiba, the IHI Shipyard at Yokohama and the Kawasaki Shipyard at Sakaide;
others were in remote areas—for example the Mitsubishi Shipyard at Koyagi.
The rise of South Korean shipbuilding
The entry of South Korea into the world shipbuilding market was, like that of its
near-neighbour Japan, the result of a carefully planned industrial programme. In
the early 1970s, a major investment programme was planned, starting with the
construction of the world’s largest shipbuilding facility by Hyundai at Ulsan, with
a 380 metre dry dock capable of taking vessels up to 400,000 dwt. Later in the
decade a second major facility was built by Daewoo, with a 530 metre dry dock
capable of taking vessels up to 1 m.dwt. This started production in the early
1980s. Two other South Korean industrial groups, Samsung and Halla Engineering
built new shipbuilding facilities and by the mid-1990s South Korea had a 25 per
cent market share and four out of the world’s five largest shipyards.10
Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the expansion of South Korean shipbuilding
capacity is that the growth has been far more heavily dependent upon the export
market than was the case for either Britain or Japan, both of which based their
initial expansion programmes upon the domestic fleet. Whilst South Korea has a
rapidly growing economy, this remains very much smaller than the Japanese or
European in terms of trade volume. The success of Korean shipbuilding almost
certainly reflects the growing internationalization of the bulk shipping industry
where, with the development of international registries and multinational companies,
the link between ship, shipowner and national interest is increasingly tenuous.
Taiwan, China and other countries
It seems to be a feature of the shipuilding industry that there are always new
entrants preparing to challenge the market leaders. Taiwan and the People’s Republic
of China, with a combined output in excess of 1.3 million gt in 1995, had both
grown in importance during the previous decade. Eastern Europe is gradually
becoming established in the world shipbuilding market. There are a few other
countries in the shipbuilding market. In 1995 they accounted for 2 per cent of
world output.
13.3 Shipbuilding market cycles
The changes in the regional structure of the shipbuilding market produced long
periods of intense competition as each new entrant, Continental Europe, Scandinavia,
Japan and then South Korea, fought for market share. This intense competition
sets the scene for a harsh commercial climate, which is intensified by the cyclical
nature of shipbuilding demand. Over the last century it is possible to identify
eleven separate cycles, as shown in Table 13.2. The course of these cycles is
charted in Figure 13.3. The average reduction in output from peak to trough was

465
around 50 per cent and the maximum
peacetime reduction was 84 per cent
during the recession of the early
1930s. Superimposed on to these
short term cycles were four longer
cycles, or phases.
The first period lasted from 1886
to 1919 and was a period of ‘cyclical
growth’, with output growing
progressively 
at 
each 
peak,
interspersed with periods of recession.
As we saw in chapter 2, this was a
period of very rapid technical change
as steel hulled steamships of rapidly
increasing size and efficiency replaced
sail. The shipbuilding cycles seem to
have followed the world trade cycles
and the level of output responded
sharply to each change in the market. During this period the cycles drove investment
by drawing in a flood of new ships with the latest technology during the market
peaks and then driving out the old and technically obsolete vessels during the
lengthy troughs. A crude but effective way of adopting new technology, while
deriving the maximum economic value from the existing stock of ships.
During the second period from 1920 to 1942 the industry faced acute and
persistent market problems dominated by the 1931 depression. At the outset there
was a massive shipbuilding capacity, which had been developed to meet wartime
shipping requirements—in 1919 the industry was capable of producing 7 m. grt of
ships a year, three times the underlying level of demand. In addition, several
FIGURE 13.3 World shipbuilding launches 1902–95
Source: Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
TABLE 13.2 Shipbuilding cycles 1902–81
Source: Compiled from Lloyd’s Register Statistics
SHIPBUILDING MARKET CYCLES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
466
European governments had been convinced by the war of the importance of having
a domestic maritime capability and devoted public funds to building up their
industries. When combined with volatile trade, these supply side conditions set the
scene for two decades of almost continuous overcapacity, interspersed by periods
of moderate market improvement. Contemporary press statements illustrate the
mood of the period. For example:
•  In the early part of 1924 it was generally believed that depression in the
shipbuilding industry had touched its lowest point. It could not be imagined
that the signs of revival would be so short lived…the immediate outlook is
now exceedingly grave.11
•  The year 1926 was one of great depression in shipbuilding.12
•  As far as shipbuilding is concerned 1930 has been a most trying time…only
one berth in four occupied.13
•  The year 1935 in the shipbuilding industry may be regarded as a year of marking
time with only one-third of the greatly reduced capacity being utilised.14
In Britain, which dominated the shipbuilding market at that time, shipbuilding
employment fell steadily from 300,000 in 1920 to 60,000 in 1931.15 Unlike the
pre-war period, this was not simply cyclical unemployment that was soon absorbed
by the next boom; it was a steady downward trend. The scarcity of orders created
intense international competition, indicated by ‘incidents’ such as a Furness Withy
order placed in Germany in 1926 at a price 24 per cent below the lowest British
price with marginal overhead recovery.
The third period, covering the two decades after the Second World War, was
one of exceptional growth. Although the industry started with output of 7 m. grt
(more than six times the pre-war level of demand—Figure 13.3), three-quarters
was built under the US wartime construction programme, and at the end of the
war the US effectively withdrew from the world shipbuilding market. Since war
damage had reduced the output of the German and Japanese industries, there was
an acute shortage of shipbuilding capacity. This persisted into the late 1950s and,
for a few years, it was a seller’s market. It was not until 1958 that a major economic
recession in the US, and overordering of tankers following the Suez closure in
1956, precipitated the first post-war shipbuilding depression, which lasted into the
early 1960s. World shipbuilding output fell from a peak of 9.0 m. grt in 1958 to a
trough of 8 m. grt in 1961 (Figure 13.3). By 1963, however, trade growth recovered,
bringing a steady upward trend in orders that resulted in an unprecedented expansion
of shipbuilding capacity to 36 m. grt in 1975—in a single year the industry produced
more shipping tonnage than was built in the whole period between the two wars.
The fourth period, which started with the 1973 oil crisis, saw a combination of
circumstances reminiscent of the second period. Trade growth was sluggish, volatile
and unpredictable. The pace of technical obsolescence slowed, with few major
advances in ship technology and a more stable size structure, especially in the
tanker fleet. There was overcapacity which was intensified by the entry of South
Korea as a major shipbuilder. In these circumstances the shipbuilding industry lost
the clear sense of direction which had been so apparent during the previous period.

467
The period started in 1975 with peak world shipbuilding output of 36 m. grt,
representing 50–100 per cent over-capacity. After two decades of continuous growth,
seaborne trade first stagnated and then declined abruptly, particularly in the oil
sector, with the result that the demand for new ships fell sharply from the pre-
1975 level. This already difficult situation in the shipbuilding market was further
aggravated by the entry of South Korea with a bid for a major share of the world
market, with the result that there was a threeway battle between Japan, Korea and
Western Europe for a share of the diminishing volume of orders.
During the late 1970s there was a major cutback in shipbuilding capacity, many
shipyards were closed and output fell by 60 per cent to 14 m. grt in 1979. The time
taken for this decline to occur reflects the large orderbook held by the world
shipbuilding industry in 1974. A recovery in the world economy during the late
1970s brought renewed trade growth which, combined with the sizeable reduction
in world shipbuilding capacity, was sufficient to produce a brief recovery in the
world shipbuilding market. Laid-up tonnage fell to a minimal level, and during
1980–1 the world shipbuilding industry enjoyed something approaching a newbuilding
boom. However, following the market peak of 1980–1, there was a sharp decline in
the fortunes of the shipbuilding industry, fuelled primarily by the collapse of world
seaborne trade. During the period 1979–83 the volume of seaborne trade fell from
3.8 bt to 3.3 bt, a reduction of 13 per cent. Severe downward pressure on shipbuilding
prices and new ordering drove shipyard output in 1988 to a trough of 10.8 million
gross tons, the lowest since 1962. Employment in the world shipbuilding industry
halved16 and many of the marginal shipyards were closed.
Finally, the 1990s saw renewed growth as the replacement of the fleet built
during the 1970s boom fell due. By the mid-1990s the volume of output had
doubled from the 1988 trough. South Korea had consolidated its position as a
major shipbuilder, and Taiwan, China and East European shipyards were becoming
established in the international market-place, opening the way for the next phase
of competition.
In a century of shipbuilding it is difficult to find many ‘normal’ years. The
combination of shipping market cycles and a constantly changing competitive
structure, ensures that this business, even more than the shipping business, is in a
constant state of change.
13.4 The economic principles
Causes of the shipbuilding cycle
It is not too difficult to understand why the shipbuilding market is so volatile
when we examine the supply and demand mechanism that drives it. This is best
illustrated with a simple example. If the active merchant fleet is 700 m.dwt, as it
was in the mid-1990s, and seaborne trade grows by 5 per cent per annum, this will
generate demand for an additional 30 m.dwt of new ships each year. If, in addition,
20 m.dwt of ships are scrapped each year, the total requirement for new vessels
will be 50 m.dwt each year.
THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
468
If, however, instead of growing by 5 per cent seaborne trade remains at the same
level for 2 years running then there will be no need to expand the fleet and demand in
each year will be only 20 m.dwt. Taking the argument a step further, if seaborne trade
falls by 5 per cent there will not be any demand for new ships. In short, a small change
in the growth rate of seaborne trade has a greatly magnified effect on shipbuilding
demand. Falls of 5 or 10 per cent in seaborne trade are by no means unusual—much
larger swings were experienced, for example, in 1975 and in the early 1980s.
Another problem with the structure of the shipbuilding market is the protracted
delay before supply responds to a change in demand. Since it often takes more
than a year to build a merchant ship, and in some cases two or three years, to keep
supply and demand in balance shipowners need to predict the change in demand
two or three years ahead, a skill that has been manifestly lacking. As we saw in our
discussion of market cycles in chapter 2, the usual pattern is for ordering to build
up to a peak at the top of the cycle, and for ships to be delivered two years later
when the market is already declining, creating a greater surplus of shipping capacity
and reducing the level of new orders.
The supply-side problem is further intensified by various ‘rigidities’ that prevent
the supply of shipbuilding capacity responding quickly to a downswing in demand.
Undoubtedly the most important rigidity derives from government policy to maintain
employment. Many shipyards, particularly in Western Europe and Japan, are located
in areas with few alternative employment opportunities, so that politicians often
intervene to prevent closures. As a result, it now takes longer for shipbuilding capacity
to respond to a major fall in demand than was the case in the 1930s.
This reasoning suggests that shipbuilding cycles are close relatives of the shipping
cycles discussed at length in chapter 2, but with special features due to the industry’s
different economic structure. Volk (1994), in a lengthy study of shipbuilding cycles,
takes much the same view, concluding that:
Shipbuilding is characterised by heavy fluctuations of demand over the short-
term and by high inertia of supply. This fact leads to brief phases of prosperity
and long phases of depression.17
In one sense, this is all there is to be said. Until the demand for ships becomes
regular or shipyards find a way of disappearing when they are not needed, the
shipbuilding industry must live with cycles. From an economic perspective,
however, this is just the beginning of our study. In the previous section we saw that
over the course of the last century this simple mechanism has produced radically
different commercial environments. Applied economists in shipping or shipbuilding
who understand the underlying relationships can recognize the way a particular
market is likely to develop. This is what we will focus on in the remainder of this
chapter, starting with the general economic relationships followed by a discussion
of the microeconomic aspects of shipyard production.
How shipbuilding prices are determined
Shipbuilding cycles are controlled by the price mechanism, and this is where we
must start. Shipbuilding is one of the world’s most open and competitive markets.

469
Shipowners invariably take several quotations before ordering a ship and there are
not the usual trade barriers in the form of distance, transport costs and tariffs to
provide shipbuilders with a protected home market. Prices swing violently upwards
or downwards depending upon the number of shipyards competing for a given
volume of orders.
This point can be illustrated by following the development of the contract price
for a 30,000 dwt bulk carrier and an 85,000 dwt tanker during the thirty years
1964–96 (Figure 13.4). If we start in 1969, when a 85,000 dwt tanker cost $10
million, we see a sequence of price fluctuations on a scale which few other capital
goods industries can match. The price of the ship almost trebled to $28 million in
1974; fell to $16 million in 1976; increased to $40 million in 1981; fell to $20
million in 1985; increased to $43 million in 1990 and then edged down to $40
million in 1996. Faced with such volatile prices it is hardly surprising that
shipbuilders and their customers have difficulty in planning for the future. Because
price movements for different types of ships are closely correlated—when the
price of tankers goes up, so does the price of bulk carriers and ro-ros—there is no
real refuge in finding market ‘niches’. Most shipbuilders can compete for a wide
range of ship types, and if their orderbook is short will bid for ships they would
not normally consider building.
What determines the level of shipbuilding prices? One obvious answer is freight
rates. A comparison of the cyclical peaks and troughs in shipbuilding contract prices
with those in freight rates suggests that the freight market is an important influence,
but this is certainly an oversimplified view. Although the economic structure of the
shipbuilding market is closely linked to that of the shipping market, for the reasons
discussed in chapter 3 shipbuilding is a separate market and events in the shipbuilding
FIGURE 13.4 World shipbuilding prices 1964–96
Source: Clarkson Research Studies
THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
470
market do not always mirror those of the shipping market. In explaining the workings
of the shipbuilding market, we are confronted with three basic questions:
•  What determines the amount of new ships that shipowners will order?
•  What determines the amount of ships that the shipbuilding industry will sell?
•  What determines the price at which ships are sold?
To answer these three questions we need a framework that relates the actions of
shipowners and shipbuilders, as well as allowing us to introduce external influences
such as government policy and the financial policy of banks into the picture.
Starting with the question ‘How many ships will be supplied?’ we must define
the shipbuilding supply function. This shows the number of ships that the industry
will provide at each price level. In the long-term the supply function depends on
the number of shipyards available. That is the starting point, but to define the
short term supply function we must determine which of these shipyards will actually
bid for the contract. This depends on two other factors, the size of each shipyard’s
orderbook and costs.18 The way these two factors determine the shape of the supply
function is best explained with an example. Figure 13.5 shows a hypothetical
supply function for an industry consisting of five regional groups of yards, each
with a different cost level. The Chinese shipyards are at the bottom of the cost
range and the high cost yards are at the top. The yards supply one ship type, a
capesize bulk carrier and the supply function shows how many ships they will
offer at each price. At the lower price of $40 million only the Chinese yards are
prepared to bid, and they only have space for two million deadweight. At $42
million the Korean yards bid and the supply jumps to seven million deadweight.
Progressively as the price rises, the orderbooks of the most competitive shipyards
fill up, making them unable to bid. With no low cost yards bidding, the less
competitive yards can win orders at higher prices which cover their costs. Such a
situation is described as the ‘short-run supply function’ because it refers to the
shape of the supply function during a period of time when the basic parameters of
shipbuilding capacity and performance are fixed.
This is very much the situation that applies during shipbuilding cycles. At any time
there is a spectrum of yards with different cost levels—the familiar battle between the
new entrants and the established builders. Five hundred years ago it was the Dutch
versus the Venetians. Later it was the Japanese versus the Europeans and the South
Koreans versus the Japanese. The high cost yards have to survive on the orders they
can win during booms when the low cost yards have full orderbooks. If they are lucky
they can survive by limping from one market peak to another, but they are very
vulnerable to recessions. As time goes by the most expensive yards give up, making
way for the low cost newcomers. Government subsidies often play a part in the process
by allowing high cost shipyards to quote at lower price levels. If, for example, European
governments provide their yards with a 13 per cent subsidy, the European yards are
able to bid competitively with the Japanese large yards at $47 million. This creates a
‘subsidy kink’ in the shipbuilding supply curve. With the existing data it is not possible
to define the shipbuilding supply function in numerical terms, but there are good
reasons for believing that it would take approximately the shape shown in Figure 13.5.
Whereas the world shipbuilding industry offers more ships for sale at higher

471
prices, the opposite is likely to be true for the shipbuilding demand function which
describes the way shipowners buying those ships respond to price changes. As prices
rise the financial case for investment weakens and only those investors with a very
profitable market opportunities or an urgent need for an new ship are willing to pay,
so the number of orders shrinks. At these high prices it becomes cheaper for owners
to extend the life of their existing ships, especially since rising prices are generally
associated with a long delivery date. Conversely, as the price falls the financial case
for new orders improves and the demand for new ships increases until, at some
point, constraints on finance or market expectations limit the number of new orders
placed and no further ships are ordered however low the price falls.
Equilibrium is achieved at the price where the demand for new ships equals the
supply offered by shipbuilders. This is illustrated in Figure 13.6. At a price of
$1,000 per cgt the 14.5 million cgt offered by the shipyards exactly matches the
14.5 million cgt the owners are willing to buy. If the shipyards try to increase
prices to $1,400 per cgt, demand falls to only 4.5 million cgt, leaving shipyards
with 10 million cgt of unutilized capacity. Conversely, at $750 per cgt the owners
would want to order 19 million cgt, but the shipyards would offer only 11.5
million cgt of ships. There would be a shortage of berths and the price would be
bid up. In this way the price mechanism matches capacity to demand.
Long term supply/demand functions
The supply and demand functions shown in Figure 13.6 assume that shipbuilding
FIGURE 13.5 Shipbuilding supply function
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
472
capacity is fixed. Given enough time, capacity will adjust to prices as new low cost
shipyards are built and high cost yards are closed. For example, in Figure 13.7a
we see an initial supply function (S1) where prices settle at a price of p1. At this
price the low cost shipyards are making excess profits, so they open new yards and
expand the existing ones. This new capacity moves the supply curve to the right
and, with no change in the demand curve, the price falls from p1 to p2. A move in
the demand function also affects prices. For example, the demand curve D1 in
Figure 13.7b might represent a situation when the trend rate of fleet growth is 3
per cent a year, requiring q1 quantity of new ships each year. If fleet growth
increases to 3.5 per cent per annum, the demand curve moves to D2, so prices
increase to p2. Higher prices encourage low cost shipyards to expand their capacity,
prices fall and so the cycle continues.
The shipbuilding market supply/demand model
The supply/demand analysis of the shipbuilding market provides a valuable starting
point, but to relate it to the real world we must look more closely at the forces
which drive the supply and demand functions. From the experience of the last two
decades the following six influences can be expected to have particularly important
roles to play in explaining the supply and demand functions for merchant ships:
FIGURE 13.6 Supply and demand function
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

473
•  shipping freight rates
•  market expectations
•  credit availability
Supply influences:
•  shipbuilding capacity
•  shipyard unit costs
•  production subsidies
As far as the demand function is concerned, the role of freight rates in generating
ship orders is easy to understand—high earnings encourage shipowners to order
more ships and thereby increase their profits. If high freight rates persist for a
considerable time this has the secondary effect of generating internal funds to help
finance new ships. Historically there has been a close relationship between peaks
in the freight market and peaks in ordering new ships. However, because of the
time-lag between ordering a ship and taking delivery and the long service life of
ships once it has been delivered, current freight rates will only be a partial influence
on newbuilding demand. The key question facing the shipowner is what level of
freight rates will prevail during the years following delivery of the vessel, and this
introduces market expectations as the second major influence on newbuilding
demand. The third important influence on shipbuilding demand is the availability
of credit. If shipping companies fund their ship purchases from internally generated
revenue, this limits the amount of ships ordered to those shipowners with the
FIGURE 13.7 Effect on price of a movement in shipbuilding supply and demand
functions
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997
Demand influences:

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
474
necessary financial resources to purchase a ship. The availability of credit removes
this constraint and broadens the market to include many entrepreneurial shipowners
without large sums of capital.
Turning to the supply function for new buildings, we immediately encounter the
difficult issue of shipyard capacity Basically, the level of supply depends upon how
many shipyards are operational and how many ships it is financially viable for each
yard to produce at the prevailing price level. In practice, the level of output depends
not only on shipyard facilities but also on the input of labour and labour productivity.
Shipyard facilities place an upper limit on output, but it is the efficiency with which
they are used that determine the number of ships built. Another major factor
determining the shape of the short term supply curve is the inflexibility of shipbuilding
capacity. Fifty years ago, when personnel policies of ‘hire and fire’ were socially
more acceptable, shipyards could be closed temporarily when there was no work.
Under modern conditions the social costs of redundancy make it difficult and often
expensive for shipyards to vary their manpower capacity in this way, so it is often
cheaper to continue selling ships at a loss. If government subsidies are available this
situation may persist for years, or even decades, flattening the supply curve.
Shipyard costs depend on labour costs, labour productivity, material costs, exchange
rates, and subsidies (which determine whether the shipyard is able to sell at prices
below an acceptable return on capital). Given a fixed level of capacity, costs and
government subsidies, we can, in principle, define the shipbuilding supply function
for an individual shipyard. At the lower end of this function there is a cut-off price
below which no ships will be supplied—no shipyard is likely to sell a ship if it cannot
expect to pay for the material and labour costs involved in building it. As prices rise,
the supply of ships is likely to increase very sharply until a cut-off point is reached
where capacity is fully utilized and additional production can be obtained only by
high-cost measures such as extensive overtime working.
13.5 The shipbuilding production process
For a better understanding of the supply/demand model, we must now turn to the
production process. Currently there are over 250 merchant shipyards world-wide
employing about 200,000 workers. The number of docks/berths and the layout
and equipment of the shipyard place an upper limit on the number of vessels
which can be built per annum. There is great diversity. Some yards are fully
operational, while others are uncompetitive and under-utilizing their facilities.
Categories of shipyard
Although modern shipyards are highly flexible in the type of ship they build,
physical and commercial factors tend to subdivide the shipbuilding market into a
number of sectors. The world shipyards today fall broadly into three categories—
small, medium and large.
Small shipyards specialize in vessels below about 6,000 dwt. These facilities
generally have a workforce of below 1,000 employees, sometimes as few as 100–
200. Some specialize in particular ship types, such as dredgers or offshore supply
craft, but the product range is very wide, comprising small cargo ships,

475
mini-bulkers, chemical tankers and a whole range of service craft such as tugs and
dredgers. Consequently, most small shipyards tend to be very versatile in their
product range. This sector is comparatively self-contained and it is unusual to find
large shipyards competing for orders in the small ship market.
Medium-sized shipyards build vessels in the size range 6,000–40,000 dwt,
although some may take vessels up to Panamax size. The constraint is usually the
size of berth/dock and the facilities to process large quantities of steel. Typically,
medium-sized shipyards have a workforce of about 500 to 1,500, though this
varies greatly. In product terms the mainstay of these yards are container ships,
bulk carriers and small tankers. More sophisticated yards handle vessels such as
short sea ro-ros, ferries and gas tankers.
Finally, some very large shipyards have docks capable of accommodating tankers
of up to 1 m.dwt and in a few cases a workforce of 10,000 or more. These facilities
generally have highly automated equipment for steel preparation and assembly.
The shipyard in Figure 13.8 was developed to handle cargo and specialist vessels
up to 30,000 dwt.
FIGURE 13.8 Shipyard layout plan
Source: Pallion Shipyard, Sunderland
THE SHIPBUILDING PRODUCTION PROCESS

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
476
Shipbuilding facilities and the production process
The merchant ship is the world’s largest factory-produced product. A 30,000 dwt
bulk carrier might typically contain 5,000 tons of steel and 2,500 tons of other
components ranging from the main engine to many thousands of minor items of
cabling, pipes, furniture and fittings—and, by modern standards, this is a
comparatively small vessel. Over half of the cost of the ship is materials. Figure
13.9 shows a rough breakdown of the main items. Steel represents about 13 per
cent of the cost, the main engine 16 per cent and other materials 25–35 per cent.
The remainder of the cost is direct labour and overhead. The material content is
higher for high outfit ships like cruise liners and lower for simple cargo ships such
as large bulk carriers. Because of their size
and value, virtually all merchant ships are built
to order and the construction period is a long
one, falling anywhere in the range 12 months
to 3 years, depending on the ship size and the
length of orderbook held by the shipbuilders.
The basic structure of the ship is, in some
ways, quite simple. The hull is a box built from
thin steel plate, reinforced by internal bulkheads
and sections to give strength. Within the hull
are various items of equipment required to propel
and control the ship, handle cargo and monitor
performance. The complexity in shipbuilding
lies in minimizing the materials and labour
required to construct a ship to the structural
standards (‘scantlings’) laid down by the
Classification Societies. The way naval
architects resolve this problem depends on the
nature of the ship. The bulk carrier hull shown
in Figure 13.10 uses steel plate to construct the
sides, double bottom, shedding plates, bulkheads
and shaped components such as the transverse
web. Sections are welded to the flat plate, for
example as side or bottom shell longitudinals,
to give rigidity. Although this structure looks
simple, it is quite complex. The main deck is broken up by hatch openings and the
hull derives its strength from the double-bottom, the shedding plates, the hatch
combings and the frames which run along the hull. Into the hull are fitted the many
components, main engine, auxiliaries, pipework, control systems, wiring, pumps.
The entire structure must be coated with an efficient paint system, offering a long
working life with minimum maintenance.
To build ships of this type the production facilities must accommodate three
main operations—the design of the ship, the construction of the steel hull, and the
outfitting of the hull with machinery, equipment, services and furnishings. These
operations are not necessarily sequential and there is considerable overlap. The
FIGURE 13.9 Cost structure of merchant
ship
Source: Compiled by Martin Stopford from various

477
shipyard lay-out shown in Figure 13.8 illustrates the way work flows through the
shipyard from the steel stockyard through to the assembly of the ship in the dock.
Although this shipyard layout illustrates the different stages unusually well, few
shipyards are designed in such a logical way. It is more usual to find these facilities
spread around the yard, with units moved from one location to another with low
loaders. The nine manufacturing stages are itemized in Box 13.1.
The production process is essentially one of assembly, and few of the individual
tasks require sophisticated technical skills. The skill comes in planning and
implementing the tens of thousands of operations that contribute to the production
of a merchant ship—materials must be ordered and arrive on time; steel parts,
fabrication and pipework must fit accurately without the need for re-work. All of
this requires considerable effort at the design and planning stage along with a
production capability to manage material handling and production planning.
FIGURE 13.10 Cross-section of bulk carrier hull
Source: Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
THE SHIPBUILDING PRODUCTION PROCESS

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
478
BOX 13.1 Nine stages in the shipbuilding production process  Stage
Stage 1: Design and estimating
The design, estimate, building strategy and production plans are produced by
shipyard staff, initially in outline and then gradually developed in greater detail
involving the production of detailed working drawings and parts lists. Computer
graphic equipment is now widely used in ship design to speed up this process and
create better and more accurate information. Materials are ordered. Developing
comprehensive and accurate information at an early stage in the design programme
is one of the most crucial areas for improving productivity and product quality in
modern shipbuilding.  Materials account for about 50–60 per cent of the cost and
labour and overheads for the remainder (see Figure 13.9) and a large merchant
ship may involve several thousand separate purchase orders. A cost estimate must
be prepared, often before the full design has been finalized and materials, particu-
larly ‘long lead items’ such as the main engine must be ordered.
Stage 2: The steel stockyard
The steel is one of the first items to be ordered and when it arrives it is stored in the
steel stockyard. The two principal steel components used in ship manufacture are
plates and rolled sections, which are used primarily to stiffen the plates. A modern
stockyard is laid out in an orderly manner and materials are retrieved using an
overhead gantry crane.
Stage 3: Steel shotblast plant
Steel plates and sections are retrieved from the steel stockyard and processed
through the steel shotblast plant. This involves rolling plates and straightening
sections to ensure that they are true, followed by shotblasting to remove rust and
priming to protect the plate from further rusting and provide a foundation for paint.
Stage 4: Plate and stiffener preparation
The primed steel plates are cut to the precise required size using profile burning
machines. Any plates that do not need cutting are transferred to the flame planer to
have their rough edges removed, and create the proper edge profile for welding.
If required, they are bent to shape using a press or rolls. Framing members are
prepared from steel sections, cut to size and then bent to shape using a frame-
bending machine. By this process the many thousands of steel components for
constructing the ship’s hull are prepared, cut to size and numbered in accordance
with the drawings. In practice, this is a flow process with a steady stream of
components moving through the steel preparation bays.
Stage 5: Assembly
The next stage is to assemble the steel components into the ‘building
blocks’ from which the ship will be constructed in the dock. Shaped steel is formed

479
into ‘minor assemblies’, typically weighing less than half a ton. The larger plates
that make up most of the hull are transferred to the panel assembly line where
framing members are welded in place to form ‘panel assemblies’. Finally, the minor
assemblies and the sub- and panel assemblies are welded together into major
three-dimensional (block) assemblies using various types of welding equipment.
Stage 6: Pre-outfitting
The hull must be fitted with tens of thousands of ‘outfit’ items such as pipes, electrical
cables, switchboards, furnishings and machinery. During the various stages of
assembling steelwork, advance outfitting is carried out. This involves the installation
of as much pipework and equipment as is possible at the earliest practical stage in
production. To achieve high levels of advanced outfitting requires large amounts of
information, accuracy and organization. Plans must be made, materials ordered
and delivered to the work zone when they are required, so that assembly can
proceed smoothly. When the materials arrive they must be precisely as specified
and fit into the assembly without adjustment or re-work. This sounds easy, but calls
for great care in planning and accuracy control.
Stage 7: Coating
Traditionally painting was carried out at a late stage in production and often
became a production bottleneck. In recent years coatings has become increasingly
prominent in the production operation. There are two factors driving this. First,
effective corrosion protection is now required by customers, as a way of reducing
maintenance costs. Second, modern coatings are technically demanding and must
be applied under controlled conditions, ideally in a properly designed paint cell.
These requirements have led to the careful integration of paintwork into the production
operation. Wherever possible outfitted steel units will be blasted and painted in
dedicated paint cells before final assembly.
Stage 8: Assembly on berth
Finally, prefabricated sections of the ship, together with those items of outfitting
already installed, are lifted into the assembly dock where they are carefully aligned,
then welded into position. Outfit installations such as pipe runs are also linked up.
Stage 9: Outfit at outfit quay  When the hull is complete, the dock is flooded and
the vessel is floated to an outfit quay where the outfitting of the ship is completed,
systems are commissioned to ensure that on-board systems are operating correctly,
and basin (or dock) trials of the main engines.
THE SHIPBUILDING PRODUCTION PROCESS

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
480
The major steps forward in shipbuilding techniques have been in these areas—
for example, the introduction of pallets for material handling and the extensive
pre-outfitting and painting of assemblies before installation in the ship. The
application of these techniques yields dramatic results. For example, a shipbuilder
using these techniques may take only half the manhours required by more traditional
methods to build the same ship. In short, the key to modern shipbuilding is
organization.
13.6 Shipbuilding costs and competitiveness
Because shipbuilding involves a complex production process the level of efficiency
and costs varies considerably from one yard to another. Although attention often
focuses on the shipyard facilities as the main determinant of competitiveness, in
reality there are many factors to consider. Broadly speaking the price competitiveness
of a shipyard depends on the six key variables summarized in Figure 13.11—
material supply, facilities, skilled labour, wages, labour productivity, exchange
rates and, in some cases, subsidy all play a part in determining how many ships are
produced, how much they cost and the revenue received by the shipbuilder.
FIGURE 13.11 Influences on shipbuilding competitiveness
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

481
Material costs
Material cost and availability is significant. Very large shipbuilding countries such
as Japan and South Korea can support a full range of material suppliers, including
engine builders, equipment manufacturers, subcontractors and manufacturers of
specialist items such as stern frames. Long production runs give these suppliers a
competetive advantage and the ability to deliver a wide range of quality components
from stock. Shipyards in areas with little shipbuilding activity have a more difficult
time. Even if they are able to obtain supplies abroad, the complexity of the assembly
operation can make this a difficult strategy to implement.
Shipbuilding facilities and productivity
There are enormous differences in the productivity of shipyards around the world.
Facilities play a part in explaining these differences in the sense that they set an
upper limit on the size and volume of ships that can be built during a year.
However output is far more dependent upon the productivity of the shipyard.
Unlike a ‘process’ industry where achieving maximum production merely involves
switching on the machinery and feeding in the required volume of raw materials,
building a merchant ship requires highly sophisticated managerial skills in terms
of planning, organization and control. Ultimately the maximum throughput will
depend not just upon the size of the facilities, but upon the efficiency with which
they are used. Some shipyards take ten times as many manhours as others to
build the same ship.
This naturally raises the question: ‘How can productivity be measured?’ As a
rule, labour productivity is measured in terms of manhours per unit of output.
Unfortunately there are practical difficulties in applying this formula to measuring
and comparing shipyard productivity on an international basis. This arises from a
lack of detailed statistics about the labour used and, more importantly, the difficulty
of measuring output in an industry where the product consists of large units, most
of which are different There are four main problems:
•  Output measurements. It is extremely difficult to establish a reliable standard
unit of production by which the output of different shipyards can be measured.
Although there have been a few successful standard ship designs such as the
SDI4, the majority of ships are not standard. Even where ships have an
apparently similar specification, for example Panamax bulk carriers, there is
considerable scope for varying the design, machinery and general quality of
finish. The best measure currently available is compensated gross tons (cgt, or
previously cgrt), but this has limited value when dealing with sophisticated or
complex ships.
•  Differences in subcontracting. The shipyard production process involves many
stages, and different shipyards have different conventions about the work that
is subcontracted—for example, some shipyards subcontract electrical and
joinery work while others do not. The accounting practice of most shipyards
is to treat subcontract labour as ‘outside goods and services’ and to include it
SHIPBUILDING COSTS AND COMPETITIVENESS

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
482
in material costs. As a result, a comparison of manhour productivity between
two ships would be distorted if such differences in subcontracting were not
taken into account, and this is extremely difficult to do at an international
level.
•  Delivery peaks and troughs. Ship deliveries from a yard may not represent the
underlying level of production owing to the size and mix of ships. It is possible
for a shipyard to be productively employed all year but not actually deliver
any ships because of the irregular distribution of delivery dates. For this reason,
throughput needs to be calculated from several years’ deliveries if an accurate
figure is to be obtained.
•  Joint product manufacture. There are considerable practical difficulties in
measuring employment engaged on merchant shipbuilding because many
shipyards undertake other activities such as warship-building, offshore and
ship repair.
For these reasons any calculation of shipbuilding productivity and cost
competitiveness is subjective. However, to illustrate the general method involved,
Table 13.3 shows the calculation of average shipbuilding productivity for some of
the major shipbuilding countries in the early 1980s. The first column shows the
estimated numbers of employees engaged on merchant shipbuilding at the end of
1982, while the second and third columns show the tonnage completed in each
country in 1982 and 1983 (an average is more reliable than a single-year figure).
Productivity measured in cgrt/man is calculated in column 4 by dividing the average
completions in 1982 and 1983 by employment at end 1982. For the reasons
mentioned above, the productivity figures cannot be regarded as definitive, but
they provide a broad estimate of the differences between countries.
TABLE 13.3 Merchant shipbuilding productivity by country
Source: Numbers employed, tonnage completed—Association of Western European
shipbuilders/various  
* Including 51,000 sub-contract jobs.

483
Labour costs arid competitiveness
Labour accounts for 40–50 per cent of the cost of the ship, so wages have a
major impact on competitiveness. The labour cost determines the total wage bill
for producing the ship and depends upon the basic wage, to which must be added
overtime payments and any bonuses paid to the workforce. In order to compare
hourly wage costs it is necessary to convert them to a common currency; for
present purposes, the US dollar has been used. There are significant differences
in the wage rate in different countries, as can be seen in Table 13.4. Applying the
labour cost per man year to the cgrt productivity per man year gives an estimate
of the labour cost per cgrt, which is shown in the final column of Table 13.2.
Differences in the productivity of various countries are to some extent offset by
different wage rates.
TABLE 13.4 Shipbuilding unit labour cost by country
Source: Compiled from various sources
Currency movements and competitiveness
Although currency movements are far removed from the shipyard, they are the
single most important factor in determining the cost competitiveness of a shipbuilder.
Since the world economy moved on to a floating exchange rate system after the
breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in 1971, shipbuilders have faced a major
problem with exchange rates. Unit labour costs vary proportionately with the
exchange rate, and given the volatility of exchange rates during the 1980s and
1990s this is clearly a very major factor in determining shipbuilding cost
competitiveness.
An example illustrates the point. A shipyard was negotiating the sale of a small
bulk carrier. The yard’s cost was £10 million and the exchange rate was $/£1.4, so the
SHIPBUILDING COSTS AND COMPETITIVENESS

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
484
best price they could offer was $14 million. Unfortunately the owner would not pay
more than $10 million, so to win the order the shipyard needed to cut its price by 30
per cent. Since bought-in materials accounted for 60 per cent of the shipyard cost,
there was no way they could possibly close such a large gap by cost cutting. The
negotiation dragged on over a period of six months and the exchange rate fell to $/
£1.06. At this exchange rate the shipyard was competitive and the contract was
signed. Although such large currency movements are relatively uncommon, it
demonstrates just how vulnerable shipyards are to exchange rate fluctuations.
As we pull all of these factors together we build up a picture of how the
competitive structure of the world shipbuilding industry really operates. At one
extreme there are shipyards with low productivity but wages so low that manhours
hardly matter. They can undercut allcomers. At the other there are the high
productivity yards, with even higher wage costs which are slowly going out of
business. This happened to the Swedish shipyards in the early 1980s, despite the
fact that they had the highest productivity in the world. Between lie a whole range
of shipyards with different combinations of wage costs and productivity. Washing
over the whole industry are the waves of exchange rate movements that can sweep
shipyards up and down the competitiveness league table in a matter of months. All
of this combines to make shipbuilding a tough business that requires a reliable
home market, great management skill and a great deal of tenacity. Despite all these
problems, or perhaps because of them, shipbuilders are some of the most tenacious
businessmen in the maritime industry.
13.7 The shipbreaking industry
Compared with shipbuilding, shipbreaking is an rough business. Most of the world’s
ship scrapping industry use manual labour to break ships in whatever facilities are
available, often a suitable beach. Although it is possible to increase productivity
by using mechanized shipbreaking methods, these are capital intensive and require
special investment, which is not easily justified given the small margin in the
shipbreaking business.
The process of non-mechanized shipbreaking falls into three stages. At the
preparatory stage, the owner of the vessel undertakes various operations including
stopping up all intake apertures; pumping out all bilge water; blocking off intakes
and valves; and removing all non-metal objects together with potentially explosive
materials. If the vessel is a tanker it must be cleared of potentially explosive gas.
This work is often subcontracted.
The next stage is to beach the ship and remove large metal structures such as
masts, pipes, superstructure, deck equipment, main engine, ancillary equipment of
machinery room, decks, platforms, transverse bulkheads, propeller shafts, propeller
shaft bearings, upper hull sections, bow and stern end sections. The remainder of
the ship is then hauled or lifted on to dry land by means of slipways, ramps or dry
docks and cut into large sections. In some of the less sophisticated shipbreaking
operations the vessel is simply winched on to the beach. Although this process can
be undertaken satisfactorily on a beach or alongside a quay, the availability of a
dry dock is a considerable advantage, in terms of both efficiency and safety.

485
Finally, the panels and sections obtained from the ship are cut into smaller
pieces as required, using manually operated acetylene cutters. The scrap is then
assembled for transport to its ultimate destination.
The market for scrap products
Steel scrap obtained from the shipbreaking process is of comparatively high quality,
especially from tankers that have large flat panels. In developing countries, the
scrap is simply heated and rerolled into concrete reinforcing rods for sale to the
construction industry. Rerolled steel is also ideal for sewage projects, metal roads
and agricultural needs. Smaller pieces are melted down. Much of the shipbreaking
industry is located in the Far East and Indian subcontinent where there is a sizeable
market for reprocessed steel scrap products of this type. In the advanced countries
of Europe, scrap is generally completely melted down to make fresh steel.
Although the scrap steel provides most of the value of the ship, the most lucrative
return comes from the 2 per cent of non-ferrous items. Diesel engines, generators,
deck cranes, compasses, clocks and furniture can also be resold. Again, the market
for such equipment is more readily available in developing countries than in the
developed countries where technical standards are more demanding and the costs
of refurbishing are higher.
Who scraps ships?
For all these reasons most of the shipbreaking industry is located in developing
countries where shipbreakers sell their products to the construction industry. This
is a relatively mobile industry. Table 13.5 shows that in the mid-1980s almost
three-quarters of the shipbreaking industry was located in Taiwan, China and South
Korea. Ten years later Taiwan and South Korea had left the industry. China’s
market share had fallen to 9 per cent and India, Bangladesh and Pakistan had taken
over as market leaders.
TABLE 13.5 Shipbreaking (by country) (1985–95)
Source: Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
THE SHIPBREAKING INDUSTRY

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
486
The explanation is that this very basic industry gravitates towards countries
with low labour costs. Taiwan’s development as a shipbreaker illustrates the
point. Demolition started with the dismantling of ships damaged during the
Second World War and expanded rapidly after import controls were lifted in
1965. Encouraged by the government to meet rising domestic scrap demand and
benefiting from a purpose-built site and from plentiful cheap labour, the industry
established itself as the world’s leading shipbreaker, with highly efficient facilities.
Demolition took place in two state-owned sites at the deep-water port of
Kaohsiung, using specially built berths and dockside cranes. The ships to be
demolished were moored two abreast along the keyside and systematically
dismantled, with a breaking cycle of 30 to 40 days. With each decade the working
conditions improved.19 As the economy grew and labour costs increased,
shipbreaking became less attractive and in the early 1990s Taiwan closed the
demolition yards and replaced them with a container terminal. South Korea was
a more recent entrant to the Far East scrapping business, but the story is much
the same. In the 1980s South Korea was the third biggest shipbreaker with a 13
per cent market share, mainly carried out in two demolition yards owned by
Hyundai. As wages rose in the late 1980s and the shipbuilding industry expanded,
the demolition yards were closed.
The People’s Republic of China entered the ship demolition market in the early
1980s and rapidly became the world’s second largest buyer of ships for scrap.
There is a considerable domestic demand for steel products and, in fact, the China
Steel Corporation was already importing a considerable amount of scrap steel
from Taiwan. Although China continued to operate demolition yards in the 1990s,
the scale of the business was restricted by government regulations controlling
currency for the purchase of ships and strict environmental regulations, and China’s
market share fell from 23 per cent in 1986 to 9 per cent in 1995.
In the 1990s the growth areas for demolition were India, Bangladesh, and Pakistan
(Table 13.4). Pakistan has one of the world’s largest scrapping sites at Gandani
Beach, with over 100 scrapping plots fully operational, each plot covering 2,500
square yards. Gandani Beach has no electricity supply or water mains and only a
few plots have electric generators. Ship demolition takes place on the most basic
level. Ships are driven on to the beach where an army of workers dismantle them.
During busy periods, up to 15,000 labourers are employed breaking up the ships
with the aid of very little mechanization. Much of the scrap material is still moved
manually, with assistance of king posts, blocks and pulleys, but the more profitable
plots have now moved into mechanization and are using fork lifts and mobile
hydraulic cranes.
Little shipbreaking is carried out in Western Europe, owing to high labour costs
and the lack of a ready market for scrap steel. There are also various difficulties
associated with health and safety legislation and environmental protection, both of
which are more prominent than in Third World countries. The only European
countries with any significance in breaking activity in the recent past were Spain,
Italy and Turkey. There are, however, a number of small shipbreaking companies
scattered around the UK and continental Europe, mainly with 10–100 employees
specializing in breaking warships and other high-value vessels.

487
13.8 Summary
In this chapter we have discussed the international shipbuilding and scrapping
industries. Although shipbuilding is closely aligned to shipping, it operates in a
totally different competitive environment that is highly volatile and shipbuilders
are constantly under pressure to expand or contract their output. During the
twentieth century there have been eleven major market cycles of this type.
The market operates through international competition, which forces change
through the price mechanism. It is common for shipbuilding market prices to vary
by as much as 60 per cent in a period of two or three years. Prices rise when there
is a shortage of capacity to meet the new ordering demand of shipbuilders, and
they fall when there is overcapacity.
Because of the continuous adjustment process in the level of shipbuilding output,
the measurement of capacity has always been a contentious issue in the shipbuilding
industry. There is no accurate way of measuring capacity, since the level of output
depends upon physical facilities (which ultimately limit the maximum number of
ships that can be built), the level of employment, the productivity of those
employees, and the type of ship being built. Thus, it is possible for a modern
shipyard with a highly productive workforce to produce twice as many ships as a
shipyard of similar physical dimensions and the same number of employees but
lower productivity.
The shipbuilding production process is simple in principle but complex in practice.
It involves assembling many thousands of different components, each of which
must be accurately produced and arrive at the workstation at the correct time. To
achieve this, a shipyard must have effective systems for generating information,
developing production plans, controlling materials and achieving high standards
of accuracy in the production of components. For this reason, productivity in
shipbuilding is heavily dependent upon management and organization skills.
For various practical reasons it is difficult to measure shipbuilding productivity
accurately, but there is clear evidence that levels of productivity vary substantially
between countries from around 15 cgt per employee at the lower end of the scale
to around 40 cgt per employee at the upper end. Competitiveness does not just
depend upon productivity; it also depends on unit costs, which include materials
costs, labour costs and the exchange rate. Differences in these areas mean that
some countries such as Sweden and the United States, which have high levels of
physical productivity, are internationally uncompetitive, whereas others such as
South Korea, which have comparatively low productivity, are very competitive.
Although the regional distribution of shipbuilding capacity depends upon
competitiveness, there is clearly a close link between shipping and shipbuilding
activities. The decline of the shipbuilding market share of Great Britain from 60
per cent to 1 per cent closely followed a similar decline in the market share of the
British merchant fleet. Similarly, Japan’s emergence as a major force in the
shipbuilding market occurred during a period of major expansion of maritime
activities under either the Japanese flag or international flags. The market share of
shipbuilding in continental Europe and Scandinavia has generally conformed to
the shipping market share achieved in these areas.
SUMMARY

THE ECONOMICS OF SHIPBUILDING AND SCRAPPING
488
In conclusion, shipbuilding is a fascinating industry, but not an easy one to
study. In nearly every area we find difficulties in measuring output, productivity,
or competitiveness, while historically the industry has swung from periods of
euphoria to gloom. Only one thing is certain: as long as there is seaborne trade and
salt water, there will be shipbuilders.
