489
Chapter 14
Maritime forecasting
and market research
If a man will begin with certainties, he shall end in doubts; but if he will
be content to begin with doubts, he shall end in certainties.
(Francis Bacon (1561–1626), Advancement of Learning, I.v.8)
Chapter 14

MARITIME FORECASTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
490
14.1 The approach to maritime forecasting
One of the most common applications of maritime economics is in the preparation
of forecasts and market research studies. Because the shipping industry is
international in its operations and highly complex in its economic structure, the
task facing the maritime researcher is extremely demanding. Many of the problem
areas have been discussed in earlier chapters of this book; the intention in this
chapter is to develop a practical approach to the preparation of forecasts and market
research reports that will be of value to decision-makers. Before doing so, however,
we shall briefly examine the purpose for which forecasts are produced and the
obvious difficulty of achieving reliable results in an uncertain world.
The poor track record of forecasts
To be realistic, forecasting has a poor reputation in maritime circles. The argument
that forecasts are never right is often put forward with great conviction by shipowners
who have been far too successful in business to have their opinions taken lightly.
Moreover, it is not a view that is confined to shipowners. Peter Beck, Planning
Director at Shell UK, came to the same conclusion when trying to find forecasts
for the oil industry:
When looking at forecasts made in the 1960s and early 1970s, one can find
many failures but few successes. Indeed one may be shocked at the extent to
which the most important forecasts and their surrounding assumptions had turned
out to be wrong.1
In the shipping and shipbuilding industries the success rate has been no better.
Some forecasts have proved to be wildly wrong, while others were right, but only
by combining a series of wildly inaccurate assumptions.
FIGURE 14.1 Comparison of forecasts of world shipbuilding completions
Source: Compiled by Martin Stopford from various sources
Note: This graph illustrates the way that group of experts progressively changed their view of the
future over a period of six years.

491
As an example, we can take four forecasts of the demand for new ships produced
between 1978 and 1984, summarized in Figure 14.1. Each successive forecast
predicted a different pattern of demand over the next 7 years. The 1980 forecast
predicted 50 per cent more demand in 1986 than the 1982 forecast, and even this
proved to be too optimistic. In defence of the experts who produced these forecasts,
there were developments in the world economy and the oil trade that they could
not reasonably have anticipated. However, the fact remains that the forecasts were
consistently wide of the mark.
Later in the chapter we shall review past economic forecasts that show how
inaccurate some predictions for the 1980s, made in the mid-1960s, proved to be.
They predicted widespread supersonic air travel but gave the computer only a
passing mention and completely misjudged the two major economic developments
of the 1970s—inflation and unemployment. With such a poor track record it is
difficult not to agree with Peter Drucker that, the farther ahead we try to predict,
the more tenuous the forecasts become:
If anyone suffers from the delusion that a human being is able to forecast
beyond a very short time span, look at the headlines in yesterday’s paper, and ask
which of them anyone could have possibly predicted a decade or so ago…we must
start out with the premise that forecasting is not a respectable human activity and
not worthwhile beyond the shortest of periods.2
The forecasting paradox
On this evidence, the case against forecasting seems formidable. The paradox is
that decisionmakers continue to ask for forecasts, and many maritime forecasts are
produced each year, a strange state of affairs when there appears to be conclusive
evidence that forecasting is a fruitless occupation.
The explanation of the ‘forecasting paradox’ is that most of the important
decisions made by executives in the shipping market demand a view of the
future, so they cannot avoid looking ahead. Questions like: Is now the right time
to buy? Is now the right time to sell? Should the company move out of dry bulk
shipping? Should we re-tonnage with Handymax bulk carriers, or geared
Panamaxes? have very large sums of money riding on them and, faced with
these questions, it is natural that decision-makers seek whatever advice they can,
if only in the hope that it will confirm their own opinion. In economic terms, the
demand for forecasts is derived from this need to make decisions which concern
the future. It is derived demand. What matters is not whether the forecast is
right, but whether the decision is right. If forecasts can contribute to better
decisions, they are adding value.
Faced with the necessity of looking ahead, we must ask the question: What can
the analyst can do to help the decision-maker to make better decisions? Beck and
Drucker suggest that forecasting should be used as a way of helping decision-
makers to think through the future implications of their decisions. Drucker argues
this point as follows:
THE APPROACH TO MARITIME FORECASTING

MARITIME FORECASTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
492
Decisions exist only in the present. The question that faces the strategic
decisionmaker is not what the organisation should do tomorrow. It is ‘What do
we have to do today to be ready for an uncertain tomorrow?’ The question is
not what will happen in the future. It is, ‘What futurity do we have to build into
our present thinking and doing, what time spans do we have to consider, and
how do we use this information to make a rational decision now’.3
This changes the emphasis. If this is the aim then the forecaster’s job is not to
define certainties but to seek out and evaluate risks against which the business
should be protecting itself. If the shipowner buys bulk carriers, what is the
chance of a protracted recession? Will he have the cash flow to survive such a
depression? How will operating costs compare with competitors? What profits
might be made by selling vessels at the top of the market and how would this
compare with probable losses during a recession? These are all issues that are
very much concerned with the future, but the part played by the forecaster is
more like the poker player calculating the odds than the magician predicting the
cards drawn from a pack.
Three principles of forecasting
All this sounds fine in theory, but how do we set about producing a research
study that will actually be helpful to decision-makers? The first point to
recognize is that, if the results of the study are to be used in making a decision,
and because there are so many different decisions to be made, no single
methodology will produce a useful result in every case. There are, however,
three principles or criteria that can be used to judge whether a forecast is likely
to be useful.
•  Principle 1 relevance. The forecast must be relevant to the decision. For
example, a shipbuilding market forecast that predicts the level of shipbuilding
output five years ahead will not necessarily be relevant to a European
shipbuilder trying to draw up a five-year corporate plan. What he needs to
know is the prices at which ships will be sold so that he can calculate whether
he can make a profit, and what share of the market he might win, which
depends on the activities of competitors. In this case a relevant forecast would
concentrate on price and competitor activity as well as the demand for new
ships.
•  Principle 2 rationale. There should be some reason why the forecast will
happen—in other words, the conclusion should be based upon some consistent
line of rational argument. Without this the forecaster is in the business of
prophecy rather than economic analysis (although in the past many important
decisions have been made after consulting oracles, entrails or fortune tellers).4
•  Principle 3 significance. The forecast must be researched at a significant level
of detail relative to the subject in hand. Unfortunately it is all too often the
case that the most important variables in a forecast have not actually been

493
researched at all in any normal sense of the word. Just like any other job in
business, forecasting requires an adequate input of skilled man-hours.
In short, companies in the maritime industry have to take decisions about the
future and these three principles establish the minimum requirements for producing
forecasts to support these decisions. We now move on to look at each part of this
process in a little more detail.
14.2 Preparing for the forecast
Three practical steps must precede the forecast. The first is to define the decision
to be made; the second, to determine who is qualified to make the forecast; and the
third is to establish the things we are trying to forecast are really predictable.
Defining the decision
The range of decisions to which forecasts can contribute is extraordinarily wide,
particularly if we take into account the decisions made by banks, governments,
port authorities, shippers and other organizations with an interest in the shipping
market. Each decision-maker has his own quite different need, as the following
brief review suggests.
•  Shipowners. All shipping companies have to make major decisions about the
sale and purchase of ships, ordering newbuildings and whether to enter into
long-term contractual agreements. These decisions depend crucially upon how
the market develops in future in terms of freight rates, newbuilding prices and
second-hand prices. Liner companies need to decide when to replace their
vessels, what type to order and what policy to follow over using chartered
tonnage. The view taken over the future volume and mix of cargo will crucially
influence these decisions.
•  Shipbuilders. Shipbuilders are concerned with future development in the world
shipbuilding market, particularly prices, as well as with the demand for
particular ship types as a basis for product development and future competition
from other shipbuilders. The decisions taken by shipbuilders are principally
concerned with whether to expand or reduce capacity and whether to invest in
new product development in certain areas.
•  Bankers. As we saw in chapter 3, much of the finance for new and second-
hand ship purchases comes from commercial banks. Bank lending officers
must make decisions about whether to approve a loan application and the level
of security required. This involves decisions about whether a ship is a good
investment, and whether the shipowner has the financial and managerial skills
to survive a protracted recession; often the question being asked is: How bad
could things get? If, in due course, the shipowner fails to service his loan
owing to a protracted depression, then the banker faces another decision: Should
I foreclose now and take a loss on the ships or wait in the hope that the market
PREPARING FOR THE FORECAST

MARITIME FORECASTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
494
will improve? Since bankers are working at narrow margins, these decisions
depend upon a view of the relative probability of certain events occurring.
•  Governments. The area of the industry in which governments are most
extensively involved is shipbuilding. For most of the twentieth century,
government ministers in Europe, North America and, more recently, Japan
have been confronted by a continuous series of difficult decisions about the
shipbuilding industry. These decisions involve issues such as whether or not to
provide subsidy and whether or not to cut capacity. Many Third World
governments are heavily involved in shipping policy, confronted with such
decisions as whether or not to set up a national shipping line and how to
manage it. All these decisions involve weighing short-term benefits against
long-term risks. If a minister decides to subsidize a shipyard rather than allow
it to close, he avoids a short-term political problem, but ties himself into a
longer-term problem if, in fact, the shipyard remains unprofitable.
•  Port authorities. Since the Second World War there have been enormous changes
in the volume of cargo transported and the type of ships used. There is intense
competition between ports to attract cargo by offering advanced cargo handling
facilities for containers, large bulk carriers and specialist product terminals.
The provision of these facilities involves major capital investment in terms of
civil engineering, cargo handling equipment and dredging. As a result, decisions
about port development depend crucially upon traffic forecasting to find out
the volume of cargo, the way it will be packed and the ship types used. For
example, the decision on whether or not to invest in a specialist container
terminal involves such questions as: How much container cargo will be moving
through our part of the coast? What volume of this cargo can we attract through
our port? What facilities will we need to offer in future to attract this share of
the cargo?
•  Machinery manufacturers. By any standards, merchant ships are massive
engineering structures and, with a total fleet of 72,000 vessels, there is an
enormous industry world-wide manufacturing components for fitting into new
ships—engines, generators, winches, cranes, navigation equipment, etc.—and
spare parts and equipment to upgrade the existing fleet. Producers of this type
of equipment are faced with decisions about what type of products to develop
and how to manage their capacity. This involves looking at trends in ship
construction, future developments in operational management of ships, ship
operating economics and the activity of competitors.
•  Shippers. The majority of shippers simply expect the maritime industry to be
there when they want to use it, but some major companies may ship cargo in
sufficient volume to be concerned about securing their future transport costs.
For example, the major oil companies have traditionally met a proportion of
their shipping requirements by running their own ships, and using the charter
market to meet fluctuations in demand. Once this approach has been adopted,
the companies are faced with decisions about the size and type of fleet to maintain.
•  International organizations. Organizations such as the OECD, EU, the
Association of Western European Shipbuilders (AWES), IMO, UNCTAD,
and the Shipbuilders Association of Japan (SAJ) do not actually make

495
commercial decisions, but they are invariable drawn into the discussion of
maritime policy. For example, the European Union produces Directives on
Aid to Shipbuilding and has commissioned forecasts for this purpose.5
Each decision will be different and forecasting requirements must be carefully
defined—it is unlikely that a ‘general-purpose’ forecast will meet the specific
need of the decision-maker, though it may set the scene for the more specific
work.
Who makes the forecast?
Although all of these decision-makers are obliged to take a view of the future
when they make their decisions, it is clear that some are better equipped to do so
than others. In general, by the time shipowners reach the position of making key
decisions, they have achieved a great deal of knowledge about the shipping market
and practical experience in judging the way events will develop. In these
circumstances, it is entirely logical that the decision-maker should take his own
view of the future. In many cases it would be extremely difficult to hire someone
with the equivalent skills to do it for him. However, such experienced individuals
make up only a small proportion of the key decision-makers in the maritime
market. Bankers, government officials, shipbuilding executives and board members
of major oil companies and shipping conglomerates are confronted by decisions
concerning a complex industry that they may have neither the experience nor the
time to study in depth. These decision-makers can hardly be expected to take their
own view of the future, and in such cases a professional forecast is essential.
The need for a professional forecast also increases as more people are involved
in making the decision. In the case of an independent shipowner buying a ship
with his own cash for registration in Liberia, there is only one person involved in
the decision—himself. If, however, he wishes to raise finance there are the bank
lending officer and the bank’s credit control department to convince. If the ship is
to be purchased by the shipping division of a large group, there are the divisional
board, the corporate board and the bank to consider, so that in some cases a very
large number of people will be involved in deciding whether or not to buy the
ship. Where large organizations are involved, it is extremely difficult to gain
agreement to a decision resting entirely on the judgement of a single individual.
Decisionmakers need to be able to study the evidence and, if they know little of
the subject, to have it checked by independent experts. In such cases a forecast
becomes essential. Returning to our original question: Who makes the forecast?
the answer is that ideally the decision-maker should do so, but if he lacks either the
time or the experience to study the matter properly, or if he has a large group of
other individuals to carry with him in the decision, then the forecast should be
made by suitably qualified experts and written up in a report.
Identifying the economic model
There is one more technical point to clarify before we can proceed to the practicalities
of making maritime forecasts; this is the thorny question of deciding what is
PREPARING FOR THE FORECAST

MARITIME FORECASTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
496
actually predictable. It is important because, however much we dress up our forecasts
in terms of scenarios or probabilities, they will only be of value to the decision-
maker if the advice offered is right more often than it is wrong, and the fact is that
some things are unpredictable. The classic illustration is the forecasting agency
that predicts that there will be a boom in tanker freight rates. Shipowners see the
forecast and order tankers, with the result that freight rates fall owing to oversupply.
The forecast is proved wrong simply because shipowners believed that it would be
right. The moral of this story is that not everything is predictable and we must
approach the forecasting process with this firmly in mind.
To develop this line of thought we need to be clear about the rationale used in
forecasting. We constantly make forecasts in our everyday life using the principle
of ‘constant conjunction’ first observed by the eighteenth-century philosopher,
David Hume, in his Treatise on Human Nature. Hume concluded that we conduct
our lives on the assumption that future events will generally follow the patterns we
have observed in the past.
For example, we expect it to rain because it is cloudy and, from past
experience, we associate clouds with rain. In shipping, we may predict that
trade will increase when the world economy recovers because this has always
happened in the past. This form of verbal reasoning is the basis of most economic
analysis. For example, we might extend the simple weather analysis by taking
account of additional relationships. Are some types of cloud more likely to
produce rain than others?
Once we start asking questions like this, the problem becomes more complex,
and to deal with this economists use the concept of a model. The first step is to
specify the precise nature of the model by identifying the variables which we
believe are related and, from what we know, guessing the nature of the relationship
between them. In the case of the weather model, one variable might be the percentage
of blue sky visible in the morning and the other the hours of rain during the day.
If we can quantify these two variables, for example by keeping records of their
values every day for a year, we can analyse the data to measure the relationship
(the number relating the variables is known as a parameter) and test the relationship.
The point of the test is to see whether the relationship between them is significant
(are the variables really related?) and stable (will the parameter keep changing?).
If the model does not pass these tests we might try a different specification. Other
variables affecting the weather might be the temperature and the barometric pressure.
If a more consistent relationship emerges, we have the basis for making a more
authoritative forecast—If the pressure is falling and there is 100 per cent cloud
cover, we can expect five hours rain. Although they are not always correct, such
forecasts can be helpful to us in taking day-to-day decisions like whether to wear
a raincoat. Precisely the same principles apply in making business forecasts, but
the time-scale is longer and there are many more variables to analyse, with the
result that it requires more skill to draw a conclusion.
Identifying an economic model and measuring the relationship between the
variables, is a challenging task. In reality some variables are more predictable than
others and successful modelling depends on recognizing the nature of the variables
and applying the appropriate analytical techniques. There are four different types,

497
which we can refer to as ‘tangible’, ‘technological’, ‘behavioural’ and ‘wild card’.
Each of these has a different character:
•  Tangible variables. These are physically verifiable and thus, in theory, have a
high degree of predetermination. For example, the world’s oil reserves, the
calorific content of an oilfield and the maximum operating speed of an oil
tanker can all be precisely defined, given sufficient information. For this
reason, tangible variables tend to be reasonably predictable provided sufficient
research is carried out—we are talking here about predicting such factors as
future achievable oil production rates from the North Sea, though not actual
output, which will depend on many other variables such as the oil price.
Unfortunately the information about this type of variable can sometimes be
inaccurate or misleading.
•  Technological variables. A typical technological parameter is the amount of
energy used per unit of industrial output. These relationships are often treated
as parameters in forecasting models, but they can change substantially over
time. In the early 1970s forecasters were confronted with the problem of
predicting how the world economy would respond to higher oil prices, raising
questions such as: Will the automobile industry be able to make vehicles more
fuel efficient? The rate at which innovation could be introduced in response to
a major price change is difficult to predict; nevertheless, with careful research,
it is possible to form a reasoned view.
•  Behavioural relationships. These depend primarily upon the way people behave.
They can be very difficult to predict and in some cases attempts to predict
them are selfdefeating, as we saw in the-case of the oil tanker forecast.
Consequently the approach to forecasting is very different. For example, in a
forecast of shipbuilding prices, a major factor determining the speed at which
prices recover after a fall in demand is the extent to which shipbuilders reduce
their capacity. In fact the question facing the forecaster is: How much will
country X reduce capacity? and this depends on decisions still to be made.
Behaviourals of this type are not predictable in the normal sense.
•  Wild cards. Finally, there will be sudden departures from the established ‘norm’.
By definition they are unpredictable and there is really very little that can be
done about them—life is, by its nature, a risky business.
Setting aside the problem of wild cards, the approach to predicting tangible and
technological variables is quite different from the approach to predicting behavioural
variables. In the former case, the emphasis is on careful research to establish the
true facts of the matter. This is not always easy, since information treated as factual
often turns out to be highly subjective. What is clear, however, is the need for
painstaking research. Behavioural variables, in contrast, are subjective and the
requirement is to understand and, if necessary, influence the way people behave in
certain circumstances. How will shipowners behave when they see freight rates
rising after a long recession? How will the Japanese shipbuilding industry respond
to a long-standing overcapacity? These are difficult questions, but in some cases
they will be of crucial importance in determining how events develop.
PREPARING FOR THE FORECAST

MARITIME FORECASTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
498
14.3 Forecasting methodologies
Market forecast or market research?
We now come to the practical issue of how to produce a maritime forecast. As we
have seen, there are as many forecasts as there are decisions, so it is not possible to
establish procedures that will apply in every case. What we can do is examine the
general methodology and, in particular, the techniques that have been found to
work in a variety of different circumstances.
It is useful to start by drawing the general distinction between market forecasts
and market research. In the present context, these terms can be defined as follows:
•  A shipping market forecast is concerned with the future of the market as a
whole, or major parts of the market such as tankers and bulk carriers. It
predicts the external environment within which a company’s strategy will be
implemented.
•  Shipping market research is concerned with a specific commercial decision. In
the case of shipping, this means studying the prospects for a specific ship, ship
type, trade flow or business unit.
The distinction is important because of the basic differences in methodology and
research techniques between the two types of analysis.
Figure 14.2 summarizes some of the practical differences between market
forecasts and market research. In terms of objectives, market forecasts often have
rather general terms of reference, whereas market research is generally linked to a
defined business decision. The methodology of the market forecast tends to be
dominated by statistical analysis, since statistics are the best way of representing
large groups where the ‘law of large numbers’ can be assumed to apply.
Consequently, analysis is numerical and often involves computer modelling. In
contrast, market research tends to be more closely concerned with technical and
behavioural variables, which are less easily represented in statistical terms—models
can be used to establish the framework, but the central issues are questions like:
How will competitors or charterers react? which are best dealt with by research
into the current views and behaviour patterns of the relevant decision-makers.
Numerical analysis is still important but is generally of a financial nature.
In preparing a market research study it is generally necessary to narrow down
the area of analysis to make the task manageable in terms of the volume of
information to be handled. This leads to one of the most important functions of
the market forecast, which is to ‘set the scene’ for the more detailed market research
study. However thorough the market research may be, it cannot afford to ignore
trends in the market as a whole. If we take an analogy from road transport, the
market forecast is equivalent to the road map that establishes where the main roads
go, while the market research is equivalent to the route plan a driver prepares
before setting out on a long journey. He will certainly refer to the road map, but
his route plan will be unique. It will deal with a specific journey and, to be successful,

499
must take account of such details as expected traffic density, speed limits, short
cuts and road repair work which might cause delays, none of which are shown on
the map. Of course motorists going on long journeys do not have to consult maps,
or prepare route plans. Many just set off and follow the road signs, hoping not to
get lost. Much the same is true of decision-makers in the shipping market.
FIGURE 14.2 Differences between maritime market forecasting and market
research
Source: Compiled by Martin Stopford from various sources
FORECASTING METHODOLOGIES

MARITIME FORECASTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
500
Market forecasting methodology
Having said this, market forecasts are widely used in the shipping industry. Some
of the more important uses are:
•  strategic and corporate planning—shipping companies use a market forecast/
scenario to ‘set the scene’ for their corporate plan;
•  product market analysis—although microeconomic in character, product
forecasts must start from a macroeconomic view of the market because this
will affect demand and competition from other market sectors;
•  international negotiations—for example, Japanese and European shipbuilders
regularly exchange market forecasts informally or at OECD Shipbuilding
Working Party No. 6;
•  government policy-making—market forecasts are required as an input to
government policy decisions on shipping and shipbuilding;
•  industrial relations—depressed market conditions lead to difficult negotiations
with shipping and shipbuilding unions; these often start with a view of market
prospects;
•  bank lending policy—banks lending money to shipowners (or deciding whether
to foreclose) must take a view on the future strength of the market, freight
rates and ship prices; a market forecast provides a good starting point for
discussing loans that involve a degree of commercial risk.
In all these cases, the requirement is for a view of how the whole market will
develop, without becoming involved too much in the precise details of individual
market sectors. As the world economy has become more unstable and computers
more readily available, it is now common to express market forecasts in terms of
‘scenarios’ (future histories) that examine what would happen if recent trends
continue or, conversely, if some variables are subjected to extreme but plausible
changes. In a commercial setting, this enables users to evaluate their level of
exposure to changing economic circumstances.
14.4 Freight rate forecasting
Probably the most common requirement is for a forecast of freight rates. Freight
rate forecasts are extensively used by banks, shipping companies, civil servants
and consultants commissioned to produce commercial studies. There are several
market forecasting models commercially available which allow users to enter their
own assumptions. Although these models vary enormously in detail, most use a
methodology based on forecasting the supply and demand for merchant ships and
using the supply/demand balance to draw conclusions about developments in freight
rates. A version of this supply/demand model was described in chapter 4 and
provides a consistent framework for preparing a market forecast of the shipping
market. To assist analysts wishing to pursue this technique further, Appendix 1
contains a description of the arithmetic structure of the model. It must be emphasized

501
that this model is only a framework, which needs to be developed in greater detail
in order to produce forecasts that are significant for particular purposes.
The practical procedure for producing a forecast using the Shipping Market
Model (SMM) described in Appendix 1 involves working through eight separate
stages.
Stage 1: Economic assumptions
The first step is to decide what period the forecast is to cover and to discuss what
assumptions should be made about the way in which the world economy will develop
during this period. Specific requirements of the forecasting model are an assumption
about the rate of growth of gross domestic product (GDP) and industrial production
(IP) in the main economic regions. Deciding which regions to include, and in how
much detail is a key task. Oil prices will also play an important part, as will views on
such issues as political instability, passage through the Suez Canal, etc.
Stage 2: The seaborne trade forecast
The next step is to forecast seaborne trade during the period under review. The
simplest method is to use a regression model6 of the following type:
Suppose, for example, we assume that there is a linear relationship between seaborne
trade and industrial production. The linear equation which represents this model is:
This model suggest that the two variables seaborne trade (ST) and industrial
production (X) move together in a linear way. For example if industrial production
increases by $1 billion, seaborne trade increases by 100,000 tons, etc. The precise
nature of the relationship is measured by the two parameters a and b. Using past
data, and linear regression technique we can estimate the value of the two parameters
a and b. As an example, Figure 14.3a shows this model fitted to data for the period
1963–80 using a linear regression:
E14(2)
E14(3)
E14(1)
FREIGHT RATE FORECASTING

MARITIME FORECASTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
502
What does this model tell us? The estimate for b shows us that during the period
1963 to 1980, for each 1 point increase in the industrial production index, seaborne
trade increases by 45.59 mt. The ‘fit’ of the equation is excellent, with a correlation
coefficient of 0.99, which means that changes in industrial production ‘explain’
99 per cent of the changes in sea trade. If we accept the model, a forecast of
seaborne trade can then be made by substituting an assumed value of industrial
production for X and calculating the associated level of seaborne trade.
How reliable is this model? One way to test it is by carrying out a simulation
analysis. We feed the actual industrial production index for the years 1981 to 1996
into the model and compare the predicted level of sea trade with the actual trade
volume. The result shown, in Figure 14.3 (a), is disappointing. Anyone who used
this model to forecast trade volume would have been wide of the mark. In 1986,
six years into the projection period, the forecast of seaborne trade is 4.3 bt but by
that year actual sea trade had only reached 3.4 bt, a 26 per cent error. Clearly the
underlying relationship has changed and the model no longer works.
The problem with very simple models of this type is that we have no way of
knowing why the relationship has changed. A more thorough approach, which
helps to overcome this problem, would be to subdivide the trade into separate
commodities, e.g. crude oil, oil products, iron ore, coal, grain, etc., and to develop
a more detailed model of the type discussed in Chapter 7 (section 7.6), for each
commodity trade. For example we might start by splitting seaborne trade into dry
cargo and oil and estimating the regression model separately for each commodity,
again using data for the period 1963 to 1980.
The results of this analysis for dry cargo analysis is shown in Figure 14.3b. For
the years 1963 to 1980 we estimate the relationship between the tonnage of dry
cargo trade each year and OECD industrial production. Once again the fit is excellent,
with a regression coefficient of 0.98. When we use the equation to project seaborne
trade through to 1996 using actual OECD industrial production the forecast proves
to be very accurate. The model predicts seaborne dry cargo trade of 2.7 bt in 1996,
compared with actual trade of 2.87 bt. A 6 per cent error over 16 years is a far better
result than most economists would dare to hope for. This model has certainly worked
in the past, though this is no guarantee that it will continue to work in the future.
When we extend the exercise to the oil trade the result is much less satisfactory,
as can be seen in Figure 14.3c. Although the model fits well during the base period
1963 to 1980, the projection for 1996 is 50 per cent too high. Clearly this is where
the inaccuracy of the original trade model originated. When the oil price increased
in 1989 many power stations switched from oil to coal and the oil trade declined.
A properly specified model of the type discussed in Chapter 7 (section 7.6) would
incorporate a price variable to pick up this substitution effect, thus providing a
more reliable basis for making forecasts—provided you can predict when oil prices
are going to rise.
Some of the more sophisticated market forecasting models subdivide trade into
many commodities and forecast each commodity trade using a set of equations. In
theory more information should lead to a more reliable result. The danger is that
it is very time-consuming and can easily generate so much detail that the underlying
rationale of the forecast is lost. The key issue is to identify a significant level of
detail to work at.

503
FIGURE 14.3 Seaborne trade models (calculated by taking regression of seaborne
trade on OECD industrial production 1963–80, with prediction for trade 1981–96)
Source: Fearnleys Annual Review, various editions
FREIGHT RATE FORECASTING

MARITIME FORECASTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
504
Stage 3: Average haul forecast
There are two alternative ways of forecasting average haul. The simple way is to
project historic trends in the average haul for each commodity, attempting to
identify the factors that might cause the average haul to increase or decrease. In
the case of the crude oil trade, for example, an increase in the market share of
Middle East oil producers would increase the average haul and vice versa.
The alternative approach is to analyse the trade matrix for each commodity, and
from this to calculate the average haul. This is technically possible and probably
worthwhile for some of the larger commodities such as oil, iron ore, coal and
grain. For others it is extremely difficult because the information about the trade
matrix is difficult to obtain, and the time taken to produce a matrix forecast is
disproportionate to the small amount of trade involved. A compromise is to study
the average haul of the major commodities in some detail, while extrapolating past
trends for the remainder of the trade.
Stage 4: The ship demand forecast
As we saw in Chapter 4, ship demand should be measured in ton miles of cargo to
be transported. The total requirement for transport is calculated by multiplying
seaborne trade by the average haul. In the past many forecasters have taken an
additional step and calculated the ship requirement in deadweight tons, but this
presents many conceptual problems owing to the fact that the productivity of the
fleet is a supply variable—it is the shipowner who decides how fast his ship should
travel.
Stage 5: The merchant fleet forecast
The supply side of the forecast starts by taking the available merchant fleet in the
base year, adding the predicted volume of deliveries and subtracting the forecast
volume of scrapping. Forecasting scrapping and deliveries is complicated because
these are behavioural variables. The minute freight rates go up, shipowners stop
scrapping and start ordering new ships, and vice versa. For this reason the forecast
needs to be made on a dynamic basis, preferably year-by-year using a computer
model that adjusts scrapping and new ordering in line with the overall supply/
demand balance.
Stage 6: Ship productivity forecast
As we saw in Chapter 4, the productivity of a ship is measured by the number of
ton miles of cargo carried per deadweight of merchant shipping capacity per annum.
There are two forecasting methods. The simplest is to take a statistical series of the
past productivity of the merchant fleet (see Figure 4.8) and project this forward,

505
taking account of any changes of trend that may be thought appropriate. Since
productivity depends on market conditions, the forecast needs to be developed on
a dynamic basis that recognizes that when market conditions improve the fleet will
speed up and vice versa. A more sophisticated methodology is to build up the
forecast of productivity using an equation of the type described in equation E5(7)
in Chapter 5.
Stage 7: The shipping supply forecast
Finally, the available shipping supply is calculated in ton miles by multiplying the
available deadweight tonnage of ships by their productivity. By definition, supply
must equal demand. If supply is greater than demand, the residue is assumed to be
laid up; if supply is less than demand, the fleet productivity must be increased.
Stage 8: The balance of supply and demand
As we have already stressed, the process of developing a supply/demand forecast
of this type depends on behavioural variables, namely the scrapping and investment
decisions of shipowners. This is the most difficult part of the model. By definition
we know that supply must equal demand, and if the forecast level of supply does
not match the forecast level of demand, then we must go back through the whole
process again and make the adjustments that we believe the market would make in
response to financial stimuli such as asset prices and freight rates and market
sentiment.
Stage 9: Freight rates
Now we come to the heart of the forecast, the level of freight rates which will
accompany each level of supply and demand. We discussed the relationship between
supply, demand and freight rates in chapter 4, relating demand to the shipping
supply function and showing how prices are established in different time frames.
This is the method which should be used. From a technical viewpoint the most
difficult element to model is the ‘hockey stick’ shape of the supply curve accurately.
Regression equations relating freight rates to laid up tonnage do not generally
work very well due to the difficulty of finding a functional form which picks up
the ‘spiky’ shape of freight graph. Simulation models offer a more satisfactory
solution.
A typical market forecast generally includes predictions of the rate of growth
of ship demand, the requirement for newbuilding tonnage and the overall balance
of supply and demand. There may also be scenarios of freight rates and prices.
Finally a word of caution. Analysts who successfully design and use a model of
this type will learn an important lesson about the freight market which only becomes
FREIGHT RATE FORECASTING

MARITIME FORECASTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
506
obvious when the relationships are quantified. As the market modelled approaches
balance, the freight rates become so sensitive to small changes in assumptions that
the only way to produce a sensible forecast is to adjust the assumptions until the
model predicts a level of freight rates which is determined by the forecaster. That
is the nature of the market. When there are two ships and two cargoes freight rates
are determined by market sentiment at auction, a process which defies prediction.
At their best shipping market models are educational in the sense that they help
decision-makers to understand in simple graphic terms what could happen, but
when it comes to predicting what will actually happen they are very blunt
instruments.
14.5 Market research methodology
Market research studies focus on a particular part of the market, usually in connection
with some specific commercial project involving investment in fixed assets or in
the development of new products or services. For example, a banker deciding
1
Establish terms of reference
1.1
Discuss decision to which study will contribute with decision-maker.
1.2
Identify type of information required.
1.3
Specify means by which results are to be presented.
1.4
Make realistic estimate of time and resources required for study.
1.5
Ensure resources are available.
2
Analyse past trends
2.1
Define market structure/segmentation.
2.2
Identify competition.
2.3
Compile database and tabulate.
2.4
Calculate trends and analyse their causes.
2.5
Extract cyclical effects.
3
Survey competitors’ plans and opinions of experts    
3.1
Identify main competitors.
3.2
Survey opinions of experts on future developments.
3.3
Survey plans of companies operating in market.
3.4
Prepare summary of the industry’s view of the business.
4
Identify key variables that will influence future market development    
4.1
Determine future market environment (from market forecast).
4.2
List key factors that will influence future outcome.
4.3
Prioritize variables in terms of their potential future impact on the market
(e.g. on scale 1–10).
5
Combine information into scenarios    
5.1
Identify scenario themes (e.g. What is the worst that can happen? What
is the best that can happen?).
5.2
Develop detailed scenarios for each theme.
5.3
Write scenarios as clearly as possible.
6
Present results    
6.1
Executive summary
6.2
Detailed report.
6.3
Verbal presentation.
BOX 14.1 Suggested procedure for a market research study

507
whether to finance a fleet of products tankers; a bulk operator deciding whether to
order a 35,000 dwt general-purpose bulk carrier or a 45,000 dwt shallow-draft
vessel; a port authority deciding how much to invest in upgrading container handling
facilities; a shipyard interesting in entering the chemical tanker market.
For each of these decision-makers better information can help to reduce the risk
of making a bad investment. The banker is interested in the commercial future for
tankers of a specific size, age and design so that he does not end up financing a
fleet of ships which turn out to be very difficult to charter. Similarly, the bulk
operator needs to evaluate details such as size trends, fuel economy, the options for
automation, cargo handling gear, prices on offer, ‘charterability of the vessel’,
resale value and what his competitors are doing. The port authority needs to know
what aspects of a container terminal are most important to operators.
This type of market research requires a combination of commercial and economic
knowledge. The statistical techniques that are so useful in market forecasting can
often be omitted; the emphasis is on identifying the factors that will significantly
influence the success or failure of the commercial decision, gathering information
and assessing how these may develop. A major part of the task in carrying out the
market research study is therefore deciding what the scope of the study should be.
For example, a shipowner thinking of buying a chemical tanker obviously needs
to consider the future growth and development of the chemical trade, but he must
also look at a wide range of factors such as the commercial strength and plans of
existing operators in that trade. A systematic procedure for carrying out a market
research study is illustrated in Box 14.1, which lists the six main tasks involved.
The first step is to establish the terms of reference of the study. The researcher
has to answer the question: What decision is to be made, and how will the study
contribute? A great deal depends upon the stage of thinking that has been reached.
For example, a liner company considering setting up a new service would need to
decide what type of operation to set up and how much to invest in it. In this case
some of the questions it must answer are:
•  What is the size of the market that is accessible to me and what share might I
win?
•  How will freight rates develop on that route?
•  What aspects of the service will be most important in achieving future sales?
•  What ship type will be most cost effective in providing this service?
•  How will competitors react to a new entrant to the trade?
Setting out the terms of reference in this way makes it clear that the decision-
maker is seeking much more than a simple forecast of the trade on a particular
route. He needs advice on how the competitive position is likely to develop and
how the commercial environment in which he will be operating will change.
The next step is to assemble whatever information is readily available on the
current position and to analyse past trends. Defining the market segment can often
be quite difficult because it may be one of the issues that the study is expected to
help resolve. For example, a shipowner considering the purchase of a small products
tanker for trading on the charter market may not be sure precisely what type of
MARKET RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

MARITIME FORECASTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
508
vessel is required. Should it be able to trade in chemicals? Is it for clean or dirty
products? How much attention should be given to tank cleaning?
Once the market segment has been defined, the next step is to identify the
competition, since in the shipping market strongly growing demand does not
necessarily bring commercial success—the shipowner may find himself squeezed
out of the market by cut-throat competition. In the case of a shipbuilding company,
this may involve identifying other shipyards with a known capability in the market
segment and assembling information about their commercial performance. In a
bulk shipping project, it may involve identifying the fleet of ships able to trade in
this market and analysing the future orderbook and financial position of other
operators. An integral part of this whole process is to compile a database drawing
together as much information about market trends as is readily available.
The compilation of the database should be done in such a way that it illustrates
the main trends affecting the trade. Often this is difficult because information is
incomplete or unavailable, but it should aim to provide an overview of what is
happening in the market, which the analyst can then investigate and explain. A
final step is to consider any cyclical effects which may be at work—for example,
recent strong growth may be due to the economic business cycle rather than a
long-term trend.
Although statistics provide an overview, at best they record only the recent past
and often give little indication of changes which are too recent to appear as a
statistical trend. For example, a firm of consultants commissioned to produce a
forecast of the shipping market in the mid-1960s produced an elegant mathematical
model based on statistics. Unfortunately, as industry commentators were quick to
point out, they made no mention of containerization, at a time when the first
services were at the advanced planning stage. Had they interviewed experts this
development would soon have been drawn to their attention.
To avoid this type of error it is important to survey the opinions of people
involved in business and the plans of companies operating in the relevant market
segment. This involves:
•  identifying the relevant experts to question;
•  deciding on a list of the questions that need to be answered;
•  selecting the most appropriate method of surveying opinions.
There are many established techniques for surveying opinion, ranging from the
personal interview to the general questionnaire.7 For example, an opinion survey
of the ferry market revealed that the commercial trend was strongly towards treating
the ship as a ‘floating hotel’ in order to maximize on-board expenditure by
passengers. This provided the basis for a new line of investigation about how this
trend would develop over the next decade.
The first three stages of the research procedure outlined in Box 14.2 lay the
foundation for the study by defining its aims, analysing statistical trends, obtaining
the views of experts, and identifying the plans of competitors operating in the
market. It remains to draw up the report, and this is subdivided into three steps.
The first is to decide what the future market environment is likely to be and how

509
sensitive the market sector is to these trends. This involves asking questions like:
How sensitive is this market to commercial conditions in other sectors of the
shipping market? For example, during the 1970s the market for small products
tankers proved to be comparatively robust against the surplus of very large crude
carriers (VLCCS) that developed in the second half of the decade. Conversely, in
the dry bulk carrier market there was a tendency for a surplus of large combined
carriers to push down into the Panamax market, forcing them into the handy bulk
carrier markets. The next two steps are to single out the factors that are likely to be
most important in determining the future outcome for the project and to examine
how these will develop. For example, a study concerning the purchase of an oil
products tanker might identify as a key factor the development of export refineries
in oil-producing countries and look into this.
Finally, a valuable presentation technique is to draw up several alternative
scenarios of how the project may develop under different circumstances. The aim
of this approach is to enable the decision-maker to think through the implications
of his decision under a variety of different circumstances. For example, suppose
some of the key influences on the market develop unfavourably, what would happen
and how would the company be able to react? Suppose, for example, the company
buys products tankers and the Middle East refineries are cancelled. Would it matter?
Is there any action that can be taken now to guard against such an event? This is
not nearly as easy to carry out in practice as it sounds, but it is preferable to the
‘spot prediction’ technique.8
14.6 Forecasting problems
Problems with model specifications and assumptions
There are many obstacles to producing a worthwhile forecast and it is useful to
round off our discussion of forecasting methods with a review of some of the
errors that can easily trap the unwary. One obvious danger area is in developing
the framework (or model) and deciding what assumptions to use. The following
problems often occur:9
1  Incorrect or superficial model specification. The forecast may analyse and
measure only surface factors and ignore important underlying forces. For
example, when considering the future of the seaborne coal trade, it is important
to take account of new technology which may, for example, change the type
or volume of coal used in steelmaking. In the previous section we saw the
consequences of not taking account of oil prices when forecasting the oil
trade.
2  Consensus assumptions. P.W.Beck, Planning Director for Shell UK Ltd, points
out one problem—the absence of independent forecasts among rival forecasters.
Beck found that there were few ‘uncorrelated estimates’ in the work done by
so-called independent forecasters, all of whom tend to make use of the same
assumptions, statistics and theories.10
FORECASTING PROBLEMS

MARITIME FORECASTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
510
3  Consensus results. When uncertain what to predict, forecasters often check
their results against other forecasts, with the result that predictions made at a
particular point in time are all very similar, and are not really independent.
4  Too much detail. There is a research rule of thumb that the researcher will
identify 80 per cent of the facts in 20 per cent of the time required to obtain
100 per cent of the facts. Put another way, it is easy to spend a long time
investigating interesting but unimportant matters and lose sight of the overall
objective.
5  Unchallenged preconceptions. It is all too easy to assume that certain
assumptions or relationships are correct and to accept them without question.
Careful examination may show that under some circumstances they may be
wrong (look how often forecasters have been caught out by oil price changes).
6  Attempting to predict the unpredictable. Some variables, such as the actions of
small groups of people, are intrinsically unpredictable and to attempt to predict
them can create a false sense of security for decision-makers who assume that
the forecast has a ‘scientific’ basis.
The forecaster needs constantly to ask the question: Am I falling into one of these
traps?
The problem of monitoring results
When we look at past forecasts, we see just how difficult forecasting really is.
Even deciding whether a forecast was right is not as easy as it seems. The problem
was neatly summarized in an article reviewing the forecasting record of the UK
National Institute of Economics and Social Research over a period of 23 years.11
The article comments:
It might be imagined that it must be possible, after a certain time has elapsed, to
conclude in an unambiguous way whether a forecast has turned out to be correct
or not. Unfortunately, the comparison of forecasts with actual results is not
nearly as straightforward as it sounds. The first difficulty is that official statistics
often leave a considerable margin of doubt as to how big the increase or decrease
in output has been. The three measures of GDP (from expenditure, income and
output) often give conflicting readings. Moreover the estimates are frequently
revised, so that a forecast which originally appeared wrong, may later appear
right and vice versa. Another difficulty is that forecasts, which were pre-budget,
were conditional on unchanged policies. Since policies often did change it would
be inappropriate to compare the forecasts directly with what actually happened.
These comments apply to forecasts of gross domestic product one year ahead.
Assessing the accuracy of shipping forecasts presents just as many problems. In
some cases we find that the forecasts are of ship demand, but there are no published
statistics of ship demand with which we can compare the forecasts to judge their
accuracy. In others, the statistical data base has been so manipulated that it requires

511
a considerable effort to reduce currently available statistics to a form comparable
with the forecast.
The difficulty of making accurate comparisons of the predictions with actual
events led M.Baranto to comment ‘The analysis of forecasting errors is not a
simple process—ironically it is as difficult as making forecasts.’12 Care is needed
to produce forecasts that are capable of being monitored quickly and easily by
users.
The problem of escaping from the present
Perhaps the greatest challenge facing any forecaster is to escape from the present.
An illuminating example of this is provided by a forecast of the British economy
in 1984, which was published in the early 1960s. The study is of particular interest
because it was so wide-ranging and explicit in both its assumptions and its
predictions. Reviewing the book 20 years later, Prowse13 draws the following
conclusions:
•  Some of the basic assumptions that appeared unquestionable at the time have
proved to be very wide of the mark. For example, the study contains the
passage: ‘It has been assumed throughout that no Government in power will
permit unemployment to rise above 500,000 (2 per cent of the labour force)
for any length of time.’ In a similar vein, it assumed that there would be an
‘average rise in retail prices of 1–2 per cent per annum.’ Neither of these
assumptions looked unreasonable in terms of the statistical trends evident in
1964. In fact, by 1984 Britain had unemployment of 10–15 per cent in many
areas of the country, while a reduction of the inflation rate to 5 per cent per
annum was regarded as a major achievement.
•  In the area of technological change, the forecasts proved to be equally wide of
the mark. Written at a time when the Concorde supersonic liner project was at
the development stage, the study anticipated the use of vertical take-off
passenger airliners crossing the Atlantic in one-and-a-half hours. As it turned
out the airlines, like shipping, preferred economies of scale to cutting edge
technology. In 1984 no new Concordes had been built, and transit times had
hardly changed, but Jumbo Jets’ had made cheap air travel available on an
unprecedented scale. In the motor industry it was the same story. The study
anticipated the replacement of the petrol engine by the fuel cell. By 1984 the
cars were still basically the same as in the 1960s, but their design had evolved,
making them more fuel efficient, better built and relatively cheaper. In all
these cases revolution was predicted, but the commercial world chose evolution.
Yet some revolutions were overlooked. The potential of computers was
recognized in the statement ‘By 1984 the electronic computer will have come
into its own’, but the study did not anticipate the revolutionary impact which
the microchip revolution has had on almost every area of business.
•  Another area where problems arose was in the long-term projections of
economic growth. The study predicted that UK productivity would increase
by 2½ per cent per annum, and taken together with a 17 per cent rise in the
FORECASTING PROBLEMS

MARITIME FORECASTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
512
labour force it was expected that real GDP would double by 1984. As it turned
out, the stagnation of demand during the 1970s and the failure of productivity
increases to materialize meant that the increase in output was only about one-
third during the period.
At the time these forecasts were prepared, inflation was running at 1 per cent and
within living memory prices had actually fallen; Concorde was the big technical
phenomenon; and the first generation of nuclear power stations had been highly
successful. In short, the forecasts seemed reasonable and it is easy to see the problems
of following any alternative line of thought. A forecast in the mid-1960s that
anticipated inflation rates of 20 per cent, or the virtual stagnation of the nuclear
power programme, would have been extremely difficult to justify. The one certainty
is that things will change and we must not be surprised by surprises.
14.7 Summary
Market forecasting and market research are the areas where maritime economics
can make a direct contribution to business decision-making. We started this chapter
by discussing the poor track record of forecasting in the maritime business and
drawing attention to the paradox that, despite poor performance, decision-makers
continue to regard forecasts as an essential part of the decision process. The
explanation of this paradox lies in the fact that some of the most important decisions
facing executives in the maritime industry demand judgement of future events.
Where individuals do not have the knowledge or experience to make such
judgements themselves, or where several different people are involved in making
the decision, it is logical to ask for a forecast prepared by an independent expert.
All forecasts should satisfy three simple criteria—they should be relevant to the
decision for which they are required; they should be rational in the sense that the
conclusion should be based upon a consistent line of rational argument; and the
findings should be based upon research at a significant level of detail.
Forecasts fall into two categories, market forecasts and market research. Market
forecasts are concerned with the shipping market as a whole and typically take the
form of supply/demand projections for major market sectors such as crude oil
tankers, combined carriers and other vessels. They may also include forecasts of
freight rates and ship prices. An eight-step programme for producing a maritime
market forecast was discussed, using the supply/demand analysis developed in
chapter 2 and described in mathematical form in Appendix 1.
Market research is generally linked to a specific commercial decision. For this
reason each study must be planned to meet the information requirements of the
decision-maker. We discussed a six-stage procedure for planning and developing a
study of this type.
In the last section of the chapter we discussed forecasting problems. Many
difficulties arise in specifying the ‘model’ underlying the forecast and selecting
appropriate assumptions. All forecasts are based on some form of implicit and
explicit model; in some cases, the problem is that the model is developed in

513
insufficient detail, while in others the model becomes too large and complex to be
manageable.
Another problem area is in monitoring forecasts against actual developments.
This can prove to be difficult, particularly for statistical forecasts, unless care is
taken to ensure that predictions are made in a form that is directly comparable
with regularly published information.
Finally, we discussed the problem of being too strongly influenced by current
events, and saw how easy it is for assumptions that appear unquestionable to prove
to be wide of the mark. This problem is so obvious, and so serious, that it reinforces
the argument for extreme caution in making forecasts far ahead. In the last resort,
forecasting requires equal measures of technical expertise and common sense in
judging what can reasonably be predicted with any degree of confidence.
SUMMARY

