515
Appendix 1
An Introduction to ship market modelling
Introduction
The first three chapters of the book, and particularly Chapter 4, were
devoted to a discussion of the economic principles that underlie the
shipping market. With the increasing power of microcomputers it has
become possible to develop shipping market models that can assist in
judging future trends in the shipping market. This appendix provides a
brief description of the basic supply/demand framework, using numerical
examples. This is not intended to be a complete model, but rather a
skeleton that can then be developed in a number of different ways.
A supply/demand model of the shipping market
Since for most cargoes there is no viable alternative to ships on deep sea
routes, the supply and demand for sea transport can be defined in the
following way:
Appendix 1
EA1(1)
EA1(2)

APPENDIX 1
516
EA1(3)
EA1(4)
EA1(5)
EA1(6)
EA1(7)
EA1(8)
EA1(9)
EA1(10)
Demand, measured in ton miles of transport required, is determined by the tonnage
of cargo to be moved and the average distance over which each ton of cargo is
transported. The supply of shipping capacity, measured in cargo ton miles, is
determined by the merchant fleet capacity measured in deadweight tonnage and
fleet performance, i.e. the average ton miles of cargo delivered per deadweight,
per annum.
These definitions are highly simplified, but they make the important point that
in economic terms, although the physical supply of ships is fixed at a given point
in time, the available transportation capacity is flexible. As we saw in Chapter 4
transport supply depends on fleet performance, which is in turn is determined
partly by market variables and partly by physical characteristics of the ships in the
fleet.
Building on the definition of supply and demand in EA1(1) and (2), we can
specify the basic structural equations of the macro model as follows:
Demand equations
Supply equations

517
A SUPPLY/DEMAND MODEL OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
Equilibrium condition
EA1(11)
Dealing first with the demand side of the model, in EA1(3) and (4) we define
seaborne trade as the aggregate of k individual commodity trades. The simplest
forecasting model would treat seaborne trade in aggregate, as we did in the example
in Chapter 14. This simulation analysis emphasized the importance of treating
major commodity trades separately. Clearly the oil trade should be modelled
separately in a way which takes account of developments in the energy market
such as changing energy prices. A more detailed discussion of the approach to
specifying the form of the functions in EA1(3) is discussed in Chapter 7. If this
approach is followed the trade model can become complex and very time consuming
to update. Alternatively, the volume of seaborne trade by commodity may be
treated as an erogenous variable, and obtained from some other source, for example
by using forecasts of trade published by consultancy organizations.
Moving on to EA1(5), the volume of ship demand generated by each commodity,
k, and measured in ton miles is the product of the tonnage of cargo of each commodity
and its average haul. At this stage, demand is expressed in terms of the total ton
miles of demand generated by each commodity, k, and it is still necessary to
transform this into demand by ship type, m. This is done in EA1(6), which shows
that the demand for ship type m is defined as the market share of that ship type in
each commodity trade, summed over all commodities. This is a simple relationship
to write in algebraic terms, but is much more difficult to define in practice. In
reality trade will be carried in whatever ships are available, which depends on
what shipowners order, so analysing investment trends may be the answer.
We pick this up on the supply side of the model in EA1(8) which defines the
fleet of ship type m as equalling the fleet in the previous year, plus deliveries and
less scrapping during the year. This fleet includes all vessels of type m potentially
available, but at any given time part of the fleet will not be trading. EA1(9)
derives the active merchant fleet (AMF) by deducting laid-up tonnage from the
total merchant fleet. This equation could be extended to include other categories
of inactive tonnage, for example oil tankers in storage. Finally, EA1(10) shows
that the supply of shipping capacity for ship type m is determined by the product

APPENDIX 1
518
of the active fleet and the productivity of that fleet, measured in ton miles of cargo
delivered per annum.
The balancing condition in the model is shown in EA1(11), which specifies
that the available ton mile supply of transport capacity of type m equals the ton
mile demand at the equilibrium freight rate (FR). If too much supply is available,
the freight rate will fall until equilibrium is achieved, by additional vessels being
laid up or reduced steaming speeds. Conversely, if there is too much demand, the
freight rate will rise until the demand is satisfied, though in the extreme case this
may not be possible owing to the time-lag in delivering new ships.
The simple model set out in equations EA1(4–11) is deterministic, in the sense
that the key equations take the form of simple algebraic identities. The model is
also ‘closed’ in the sense that any change in demand must be matched by an
identical change in supply, and vice versa. As a practical illustration of the basic
shipping market model, we can take the three market segments for oil tankers,
combined carriers and dry cargo vessels. The model, calculations are shown for
tankers in Table A1.1, for dry cargo vessels in Table A1.2. Taking tankers as an
example, the calculations can be, briefly summarized as follows:
1  Starting from the oil trade in column 1 and average haul in column 2, the oil
trade is calculated in btm in column 3. A forecast would require predicting
both of these variables exogenously.
2  Oil tanker demand in column 5 is calculated by deducting combined carrier
cargo (column 4) from oil trade (column 3). This calls for a judgement about
how the combined carrier fleet will change is size and how it will be distributed
between the oil and dry cargo trades. This is usually a matter of relative
freight rates, which means that so long as there is a combined carrier fleet the
tanker market cannot be treated in isolation from the rest of the market.
3  The supply of tanker capacity starts from the total fleet in column 11, deducts
tankers in grain (a rarity nowadays), tankers in oil storage (column 9) and
tankers laid up (column 8), deriving the active tanker fleet in column 9.
4  Fleet performance is shown in column 7 in ton miles/dwt and tanker supply in
column 6 in btm. As a ‘memo’ item column 8 show the tons per deadweight
carried by the tanker fleet. This is another way of viewing productivity.
The statistics in these tables provide historical trends showing the relationships
between the variables and the way they have changed in the past. To make a
forecast requires input assumptions for the tanker fleet, trade and the combined
carrier fleet in oil. From these variables surplus tonnage can be calculated as the
balancing item, on the assumption that supply must equal demand. Substituting
these into the model, the volume of surplus tonnage can be calculated. For good
order Table A1.3 shows the underlying supply/demand model for the combined
carrier fleet. The three supply/demand models in Tables A1.1–A1.3 can be
progressively enlarged so that it generates its own forecasts of the key assumptions,
for example by introducing equations to predict the future level of oil trade, average
haul, fleet growth, etc. (see Chapter 14). Since the variables on the supply side
include behavioural variables, automating them is very difficult.

519
A SUPPLY/DEMAND MODEL OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
Once the level of surplus tonnage has been established, an estimate can be made
of the level of freight rates. In extreme cases where there is a very large surplus
this is easy. We know that freight rates will fall to operating costs. The difficulty
lies in modelling market behaviour when the demand curve is hovering in the
‘kink’ of the supply curve. Sometimes this is done with regression equations, but
a simulation model is likely to work better. Whatever method is used, the first
lesson modellers learn is that when the market is close to balance, tiny changes in
supply or demand send rates shooting up or down, which makes forecasting very
difficult. Unfortunately that is how the shipping market works. If it was easy to
predict, there would be no need for a market.

APPENDIX 1
520
TABLE A1.1 Supply/demand model—tanker fleet
Source:   1 Fearnleys Review, Table 1-Oil+Oil Products
 2 (3)/(1)*1,000
  3 Fearnleys Review, Table 2-Oil+Oil Products
  4 Fearnleys World Bulk Trades, Table 2
  5 (5) (3)–(4)
  6 (5)/(7)* 1,000
  7 (11)-(10)-(9)-(8)
  8 Fearnleys Review Table 7, at 31 Dec.
  9 Fearnleys Review Table 8, at 31 Dec.
10 John I.Jacobs Review
11 Fearnleys Review Table 3, at 31 Dec.

521
A SUPPLY/DEMAND MODEL OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
TABLE A1.2 Supply/demand model—dry cargo fleet
Source: 1
Fearnleys Review, Table 1-Total Dry Cargo
2
(3)/(1)*1,000
3
Fearnleys Review, Table 2-Total Dry Cargo
4
Fearnleys World Bulk Trades, Table 2
5
(3)—(4)
6
(5)/(7)*1,000
7
(11)+(10)+(9)-(8)
8
Fearnleys Review Table 7, at 31 Dec.
9
John I.Jacobs Review
10 Fearnleys Review Table 3, at 31 Dec.
11 Fearnleys Review Table 3, at 3 1 Dec.

APPENDIX 1
522
TABLE A1.3 Supply/demand model–combined carrier fleet
Source: 1
Fearnleys World Bulk Tades, Table 2
2
Fearnleys World Bulk Trades, Table 2
3
(1)+(2)
4
(3)/(5)*1000
5
(7)-(6)
6
Fearnleys Review Table 7, at 3 1 Dec.
7
Fearnleys Review Table 3, at 3 1 Dec.
