523
Appendix 2
Tonnage measurement and conversion
factors
A problem that recurs frequently in the shipping industry is the need to
measure the size of a ship or the size of a fleet of ships. One reason for
doing this is to measure the cargo carrying capacity, but there are many
other commercial reasons. For example, port authorities will wish to
charge large ships higher wharfage fees than small ships, and the same
applies to the Panama and Suez Canal Authorities. To meet these needs
a whole range of different measurement units have been developed in
the shipping industry, each adapted to some particular need. In this section
we briefly review the principal units currently in use.
Gross registered tonnage (grt)
One major issue of concern to shipowners, particularly liner companies
handling low-density cargo, is the internal volume of the ship, and this
is recorded by the gross registered tonnage. The grt is a measure of the
total permanently enclosed capacity of the ship and consists of:
Appendix 2

APPENDIX 2
524
•  underdeck tonnage
•  ’tweendeck tonnage
•  superstructures
•  deckhouses and other erections.
Certain spaces such as navigational spaces (wheelhouse, chart rooms, etc.), galleys,
stairways, light and air spaces are exempted from measurement, in order to
encourage their adequate provision. The official gross tonnage of a vessel is
calculated by the Government Surveyor when it is first registered. One ton equals
100 cubic feet of internal space.
Gross tonnage (gt)
The 1969 IMO Tonnage Convention introduced a new simplified standard procedure
for calculating gross tonnage, and this is now used in all countries that are signatories
to the convention. Instead of going through the laborious process of measuring
every open space in the ship, the gross tonnage is calculated from the total volume
of all enclosed spaces, measured in cubic metres, using a standard formula. For
some ship types, especially those with complex hull forms, the gt and the grt may
be significantly different.
Net registered tonnage (nrt)
Under the existing rules, nrt is supposed to represent the cargo volume capacity of
the ship and is obtained by deducting certain non-revenue-earning spaces from the
grt. The net registered tonnage is expressed in units of 100 cubic feet.
Net tonnage (1969)
A formula introduced by the 1969 Tonnage Convention gives net tonnage (1969)
as a function of the moulded volume of all the ship’s cargo spaces, with corrections
for draughts less than 75 per cent of the ship’s depth and for the number of berthed
and unberthed passengers. The net tonnage so calculated cannot be less than 30 per
cent of gt. The net tonnage is also dimensionless.
Deadweight (dwt)
In many trades the principal concern is with measuring the cargo-carrying capacity
of a fleet of ships, and for this purpose deadweight tonnage is used. The deadweight
of a ship measures the total weight of cargo that the vessel can carry when loaded
down to its marks, including the weight of fuel, stores, water ballast, fresh water,
crew, passengers and baggage.

525
COMPENSATED GROSS TONNAGE
As a rule, the non-cargo items account for about 5 per cent of the total deadweight
in medium-sized ships, although the proportion is lower in large vessels. As an
example, a 35,000 dwt bulk carrier would probably be able to carry about 33,000
deadweight of cargo.
Deadweight can also be measured as the difference between the loaded ship
displacement and its lightweight (see below for definition).
Compensated gross tonnage (cgt)
This unit of measurement was developed for the totally different purpose of
measuring the level of shipbuilding output. In the early 1970s, shipbuilders in
Europe and Japan had reached the conclusion that inter-country comparisons of
shipbuilding output, measured in deadweight or gross registered tonnage, were
unreliable because some ships had a much higher work content per gross ton than
others. For example, a passenger ferry of 5,000 gross tons may involve the
shipbuilder in as much work as a bulk carrier of 15,000 gross tons. To overcome
this problem, a new standard unit called compensated gross registered tonnage
(cgrt) was developed. The cgrt of a ship was calculated by multiplying the grt of
a ship by an appropriate conversion ship factor for that ship type. A set of standard
conversion factors was agreed at the OECD in 1977. In 1984, to take account of
the move to gross tonnage, a new set of conversion factors was agreed at the
OECD and some examples are summarized in Table A2.1. Under this system a
VLCC of 250,000 dwt with a gross tonnage of 125,000 gt would have a cgt of
31,250.
As a basis for estimating the average relationship between gross tonnage,
deadweight tonnage and compensated gross tonnage, Table A2.2 shows the actual
conversion factors for vessels completed in 1984.
TABLE A2.1 Average cgt coefficients
Source: Selected cgt coefficients proposed and agreed by experts of the Shipbuilder’s Association
of Japan and Association of Western European Shipbuilders  Note: The cgt of a ship is calculated by
multiplying the gross tonnage by the appropriate factor shown in the above table.

APPENDIX 2
526
Lightweight (Iwt)
A ship’s lightweight is the weight of the vessel as built, including boiler water,
lubricating oil and the cooling system water.
Standard displacement (sd)
This is the theoretical but accurate weight of the vessel fully manned and equipped
with stores and ammunition but without fuel or reserve feed water.
Suez and Panama tonnages
For ships transiting the Suez and Panama Canals, different systems of measurement
are used to assess the dues payable. All ships have to be specially measured for the
assessment of their dues when passing through these areas.
TABLE A2.2 Conversion factors: Average conversion factors for dwt, grt and cgt
(based on all ships delivered in 1984)
