I WHY STUDYCYCLES? The odds change as our position in the cycles changes. I change our investment stance as these thingschange, we’re being passive regarding cycles; in other words, we’re ignoring the c tilt the odds in our favor.But if we apply some insight regardi cycles, we can increase our bets and place them on more aggress investmentswhen the odds are in our favor,and we can take money off the table and increase our defensiveness when the odds are a us. Investing is a matter of preparing for the financial future. define the task: we assemble portfolios today that we hope will bene the events that unfold in the years ahead. For professionalinvestors, success consists of doing this better than the average investor, or outperforming an assigned market benchmark performance of whichis determined by the actions of all the But achieving that kind of success is no small challenge: although easy to generate average investment performance, it’s quite hard to aboveaverage. One of the most important foundational elements of my investme philosophy is my conviction that we can’t know what the “macro futur in store for us in terms of thingslike economies, markets or geop put it more precisely, few people are able on balance to know macro futurethan others. And it’s only if we know more than other that consists of having better data; doing a superior job of interp we have; knowing what actions to take on the basis of or our having the emotional fortitude required to take those actions) that forecasts will lead to outperformance. In short, if we have the same information as others, analyze it way, reach the same conclusions and implement them the same way, we shouldn’t expect that process to result in outperformance. And it’s difficult to be consistentlysuperior in those regards as relates

So, in my view, tryingto predict what the macro futureholds is help investors achieve superior investment performance. Very few inves are known for having outperformed through macro forecasting Warren Buffett once told me about his two criteria for a de information: it has to be important, and it has to be know “everyone knows” that macro developments play a dominant role determiningthe performance of markets these days, “macro investors” wholehave shown ratherunimpressive results. It’s not that the macr matter, but ratherthat very few people can master it. For most knowable (or not knowable well enough and consistentlyenough for to outperformance). Thus I dismiss macro prediction as something that will bring inv success for the vast majority of investors, and I certainly inclu that group. If that’s so, what’s left? Whilethere are lots of detai nuances, I think we can most gainfully spendour time in three gene tryingto know more than othersabout what I call “the knowable”: the fundamentals of industries, companies and securities, being disciplined as to the appropriate price to pay for a partici those fundamentals, and understanding the investment environment we’re in and deciding strategicallyposition our portfolios for it. A great deal has been written on the first two topics. Together constitute the key ingredients in “security analysis” and “value inves judgments regarding what an asset can produce in the future—usually terms of earnings or cash flow—and what those prospects make the asset worthtoday. What do value investors do? They strive to take advantage of discrepa between “price” and “value.” In order to do that successfully, quantify an asset’s intrinsic value and how it’s likely to change (b) assesshow the current market price compares with the asset’s value,past pricesfor the asset, the pricesof other assets, and “theoretica fair” pricesfor assetsin general. Then they use that information to assemble portfolios. Most of the tim their immediate goal to hold investmentsoffering the best available value propositions: the assetswith the greatest upside potential and/or of upside potential to downside risk. You mightargue that assembling portfolio should consist of nothing more than identifying the asset highest value and the ones whose pricesmost understate their value.That be true in general and in the long term, but I think another

profitably enter into the process: properly positioning a portfolio for likely to happen in the market in the years immediately ahead In my view, the greatest way to optimize the positioning of a given point in time is through deciding what balance it should aggressiveness and defensiveness. And I believe the aggressiveness/defensiveness balance should be adjusted over time in response to changes in the state of the investment environment number of elements stand in their cycles. The key word is “calibrate.” The amount you have invested, your allocation of capital among the various possibilities, and th of the thingsyou own all should be calibrated along a continu runs from aggressive to defensive. . . . Whenwe’re getting v cheap, we should be aggressive; when we’re getting value expensi we should pull back. (“Yet Again?,” September 2017) Calibrating one’s portfolio position is what this book is mostly abou ∾ One of the key wordsrequired if one is to understand the reaso cycles is “tendencies.” If the factors that influence investing were regular and predictab example, if macro forecasting worked—we would be able to “will happen.” Yet the fact that that’s not the case doesn’t mean we’re helpless in contemplating the future. Rather, we can talk abou mighthappen or should happen, and how likely they are to happ thingsare what I call “tendencies.” In the investment world, we talk about risk all the time, but the universal agreement about what risk is or what it should implyfor behavior. Some people think risk is the likelihood of losingmoney, (including many finance academics) think risk is the volatility of asset or returns. And there are many other kinds of risk—too many to cove I lean heavily toward the first definition: in my view, risk is likelihood of permanent capital loss. But there’s also such a thing opportunity risk: the likelihood of missing out on potential gains.Put together and we see that risk is the possibility of thingsnot going want. What is the originof risk? One of my favorite investment philosop late Peter Bernstein, said in an issue of his Economics and Portfolio newsletter titled “Can We Measure Risk with a Number?” (June 2007):

Essentially risk says we don’t know what’s going to happen. . . walk every moment into the unknown. There’s a range of outcom and we don’t know where[the actualoutcome is] going to fall within the range. Often we don’t know what the range is. You’ll find belowa few ideas (summarized very briefly from the treatment provided in my memo “Risk Revisited Again” of June think follow directly from the starting point provided by Bernstein. mighthelp you understand and cope with risk. As retired London Business School professor Elroy Dimson sai means more thingscan happen than will happen.” For each event in economics, business and markets (among other things), if only one could happen—if there could be only one outcome—and if it was predi there would, of course, be no uncertainty or risk. And with no regarding what was going to happen, in theory we could know exact position our portfolios to avoid loss and garner maximum gains.But and in investing, since there can be many different outcomes, uncertainty risk are inescapable. As a consequence of the above, the futureshould be vie fixed outcome that’s destined to happen and capable of being predi a range of possibilitiesand—hopefully on the basis of insight into respective likelihoods—as a probability distribution.Probability distributions reflect one’s view of tendencies. Investors—or anyone hoping to deal successfullywith the future— form probability distributions, either explicitly or informally. If it’s done those probabilities will be helpful in determiningone’s proper cours action. But it’s still essential to bear in mind that even if we probabilities, that doesn’t mean we know what’s going to happen. Outcomes regarding a given matter may be governed by a pro distribution in the long run, but with regard to the outcome of there can be great uncertainty. Any of the outcomes included in a can occur, albeit with varying probabilities, since the process throu the outcome is chosen will be affected not only by the merit randomness. To invertDimson’s statement, even though many thingscan happen, only one will. We may know what to expect “on average,” may have no connection with what actually will happen. In my way of thinking about it, investment success is like the lottery winner. Both are determined by one ticket (the outcome) being from a bowlful (the full range of possible outcomes). In each case, outcome is chosen from among the many possibilities. Superior investors are people who have a better sense for what tic in the bowl, and thus for whether it’s worthparticipating in the

other words, while superior investors—like everyone else—don’t know exactly what the futureholds,they do have an above-average understand of futuretendencies. As an aside, I want to add a thought here. Most people thi deal with the futureis by formulating an opinion as to what’s happen, perhaps via a probability distribution.I think there are actua requirements, not one. In addition to an opinion regarding what happen, people should have a view on the likelihood that their prove correct. Some events can be predicted with substantial confidence will a given investment grade bond pay the interest it promises?), some uncertain (will Amazon still be the leaderin online retailing in some are entirely unpredictable (will the stock market go up or month?) It’s my point here that not all predictions should be treate likely to be correct, and thus they shouldn’t be relied on equally. most people are as awareof this as they should be. ∾ A good way to think about the superior investor described aboveis someone whose insight into tendencies permits him to tilt the favor. Let’s say there are 100 balls in a jar, some black and some white. color should you bet will come up? If you don’t know anything about the contents of the jar, betting be just a matter of guessing: uninformed speculation.The situati similar if you know there are 50 black and 50 white. You wisely bet on black as white, but doing either wouldn’t give than a 50:50 chance of being right. Thus betting would be you’re offered odds that are at least even—and unless you’re avoid paying an admission charge (in investing, a commission asked spread) to play. Betting on black or white at even odds very profitable other than if you got lucky, and luck isn’t somet can count on. Betting in the absence of a knowledge edge contents of the jar wouldn’t be dependably profitable. But what if you do have special insight regarding the conten Let’s say you know there are 70 black balls and 30 white. That allow you to win more often than you lose. If you can bet $10 against someone who gives you even odds, you’llwin $10 70% of time and lose $10 only 30% of the time, for an expected profit 10 picks.(Note: these will be the outcomes on average over number of trials, but they are subject to significant variation run due to randomness.)

Of course, your betting partner will only give you even odds black (a) if he doesn’t know the balls are 70% black and 30% (b) if he doesn’t know that you do know. If he knew about the contents of the jar, he would give you only 30:70 on black,and the bet would be back to being profitless. In other words, in order to win at this game more often than you have to have a knowledge advantage. That’s what the superi investor has: he knows more than othersabout the futuretendencies. Yet it’s important to remember what I said earlier: even if probabilities—that is, even if you do have superior insight tendencies—you still don’t know what’s going to happen. Even if ratio of balls in the jar is 70 black to 30 white, you color the next one picked will be. Yes, it’s more likely to be white, but it’ll still be white 30% of the time. Whenthere are as well as black in the jar, and especially when random and forcesare at work when the next ball is chosen, there can be regarding the outcome. But all this being said, there doesn’t have to be certainty in game to be worthplaying. A knowledge advantage regarding the tendencies is enough to createsuccess in the long run. And that brings us to the payoff from understanding cycles. investor doesn’t know much about it: He doesn’t fully understand the nature and importance of cycles He hasn’tbeen around long enough to have lived through many He hasn’tread financial history and thus learned the lessons cycles. He sees the environment primarily in terms of isolated events than taking note of recurring patterns and the reasons behind Most important, he doesn’t understand the significanceof cycles what they can tell him about how to act. The superior investor is attentive to cycles. He takes note of patterns seem to be repeating, gains a sense for wherewe stand in cycles that matter, and knows those thingshave implications for This allows him to make helpful judgments about cycles and wher in them. Specifically: Are we close to the beginning of an upswing, or in the If a particular cycle has been rising for a while, has it we’re now in dangerous territory?

Does investors’ behavior suggest they’re being driven by greed fear? Do they seem appropriately risk-averse or foolishly risk-tolerant? Is the market overheated (and overpriced),or is it frigid (and because of what’s been going on cyclically? Taken together, does our current position in the cycle imply should emphasize defensiveness or aggressiveness? Attention to these elements gives the superior investor an edge tha him to win more often than he loses. He understandsthe tendencies or thus he knows something that othersdon’t about the color of the balls jar. He has a sense for whether the chances of winning excee losing; thus he is able to investmore when they are favorable and they aren’t. Importantly, all these thingscan be assessed on the observations regarding current conditions. As we’ll see in later chap can tell us how to prepare for the futurewithout requiring that predict the future. Remember, wherewe stand in the various cycles has a strong the odds. For example, as we’ll see in later chapters, opportunities investment gains improve when: the economy and company profits are more likely to swingupwar down, investor psychology is sober ratherthan buoyant, investors are conscious of risk or—even better—overly concerned risk, and market priceshaven’t moved too high. Thereare cycles in all these things(and more), and knowing wh stand within them can help us tilt the odds in our favor.In short movement through the cycle repositions the probability distribution governing futureevents. Perhaps I should illustrate with regard to inves Whenour position in the various cycles is neutral, the ou “normal.”

Whenthe cycles are positioned propitiously, the probability distribut shifts to the right, such that the outlook for returns is now tilted Our favorable position in the cycles makes gains more likely and so. But when the cycles are at dangerous extremes, the odds are ag meaning the likelihoods are less good. There’s less chance of gain chance of loss.

The same is true when our position changes in only a singlecy example, regardless of what’s going on with regard to the econ company profits (that is, as the academics say, ceteris paribus thingsbeing equal”), the outlook for returns will be better when inves depressed and fearful (and thus allow asset pricesto fall) and worsewhen they’re euphoric and greedy (and drive pricesupward). The odds change as our position in the cycles changes. If our investment stance as these thingschange, we’re being passive regar cycles; in other words, we’re ignoring the chance to tilt the But if we apply some insight regarding cycles, we can increase place them on more aggressive investmentswhen the odds are in our favor and we can take money off the table and increase our defensiven odds are against us. The student of cycles doesn’t know for a fact what’s go —anymore than someone with insight regarding the balls in the jar what color ball will come out next. But both have a knowledge advantage regarding what’s likely. The student’s knowledge of cycles and for wherewe stand at a point in time can make a big contributio that must be present in order for an investor to achieve super ball-chooser who knows the ratio is 70:30 has an advantage. So investor who knows better than otherswherewe stand in the cycle.It’s purpose of this book to help you become that person. In that interest, I’ll describe a number of cyclical processe take place in real time. The oscillations mightseem extreme, and in fact may be, since they’re chosen from the experience of a half-centur point. And they may give the impression that the events under discussion were compressed in time, whereas in truth they took months and years

develop. But these examples are real, and I hope they’ll make my clear.