II THE NATURE OF CYCLES Most people think of cycles in terms of a series of events. people understand that these events regularly follow each other in usual sequence: upswings are followed by downswings, and then eventually by new upswings. But to have a full understanding o cycles, that’s not enough. The events in the life of a c be viewed merely as each being followed by the next, but—m more importantly—as each causing the next. When I meet with Oaktree clients, they almost always ask them make sense of what’s going on in the worldor in the mark usually want to know about one particular cycle or another and wher stand in it. I invariably pull out a sheet of paper and make a discussion. There’s usually a line that stretches from lower left to upper rig line fluctuates up and down around it. Together they look like this.

WhenI started to organize for the task of writing this bo my Oaktree bag and founda large number of such drawings. I them in the course of describing several different phenomena,and annotated differently. But each one related to a cycle worthy of The chapters in this book will generally be devoted to those cycli phenomena. Before moving aheadwith my discussion of cycles, I want to something I mentioned in The Most Important Thing. I confess between discussing the ups and downs of cycles and the sideoscillations of pendulums, applying the cycle label to some phenomena and (as seen in chapter VII) the pendulum label to others(usually those to psychology). Sometimes I’ll talk about a given phenomenon as sometimes as a pendulum. But when pressed, I find it hard to between the two or to say why one gets one label and not the I tend to think about thingsvisually, so perhaps I can use an describe the connection between cycles and pendulums. As I will length later, cycles oscillate around a midpoint (or a secul pendulums hang over a midpoint (or norm)and swingback and forth from there. But if you take the hang-point of the pendulum, turn it on drag it from left to right as it oscillates, what do you get? A Therereally is no fundamental difference. I’ll even admit that a pe is little more than a special case of a cycle,or perhaps just make reference to particular cycles. My reasons for referring to as cycles and othersas pendulums are clear to me. I hope they clear to you as well. Or, at minimum, I hope my use of the detract from what you take from this book. The bottom line is that, in the worldinvestors inhabit, cycles and pendulums swingback and forth. Cycles and pendulum swings come many formsand relate to a wide variety of phenomena,but the unde reasons for them—and the patterns they produce—have a lot in they tend to be somewhat consistent over time. Or as Mark Twain to have said (although there’s no evidence he actually said it), doesn’t repeatitself, but it does rhyme.” Whether Twain said it or not, that sentence sums up a lot is about. Cycles vary in terms of reasons and details, and but the ups and downs (and the reasons for them)will occur forev producing changes in the investment environment—and thus in the that’s calledfor. The central line in my drawings constitutes a midpoint around cycle oscillates. It sometimes has an underlying direction or secular (“secular” as in “of or relating to a long term of indefinite Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary),and that’s usually upward. So, over

time and in the long run, economies tend to grow, companies’ profits increase and (largely because of those things) markets tend to these developments were scientific or wholly natural, physical proce economies, companies and markets mightprogress in a straight line constant rate (at least for a while). But of course, they’re The fact is that the performance of these thingsis heavily inf short run by, among other things, the involvement of people, far from steady. Rather they fluctuate from time to time, often becau thingswe can lump under the broad heading of “psychology.” Thus peop behavior varies. . . certainly as the environment varies, absence of changes in the environment, too. It’s the oscillation of thingsaround the midpoint or secular tre book is largely about. The oscillation bedevils people who don’t it, are surprised by it or, even worse, partake in and contr I’ve said before, it often presents profit opportunities for those who understand, recognize and take advantage of cyclical phenomena. ∾ It’s clear from looking at my drawings for a few seconds that of cyclical phenomena can be understood as taking place in a identifiable phases: a) recovery from an excessively depressed lower extreme or “low” toward the midpoint, b) the continued swingpast the midpoint toward an upper extrem “high,” c) the attainment of a high,

d) the downward correction from the high back toward the midpo mean, e) the continuation of the downward movement past the midpo toward a new low, f) the reaching of a low, g) once again,recovery from the low back toward the midpoint, h) and then, again,the continuation of the upward swingpast midpoint, toward another high. It’s important to note from the abovethat there cannot be said to “starting point” or “ending point” for a cycle.Any of the can be described as representing the beginning of a cycle . any stage in between. The simplistic narrator may find it easy to talk about the beginnin cycle,but someone a bit more sophisticated can find that extremely Here’s what I wrote on this subject in “NowIt’s All Bad?” Henry Kissinger was a member of TCW’s board when I w and a few times each year I was privileged to hear him hold f worldaffairs. Someone would ask, “Henry, can you explain yesterday’s events in Bosnia?” and he’d say, “Well, in 1722 . point is that chain reaction-type events can only be understood in context of that whichwent before. If someone asks, “Howdid we get to this point?” or “What reach that high (or low)?” invariably the explanation has to be based events that went before. But that being said, it may not be easy just how far back to reach for the starting point for your narrative. People often ask me “whatcaused the cycle to begin?” or “a the end of the cycle?” I consider these improper questions, since neither begin nor end. Betterquestions mightbe: “whatcaused the curre leg to begin?” or “how far have we gone since the beginning of cycle?” or “are we close to the end of the down-leg?” You migh whether we’re close to the end of a cycle,as long as you defin from one peak to the next, or from trough to trough. But—in such a definition—cycles do not have a defined beginning, and will never end. ∾ The cycle oscillates, as I mentioned, around the midpoint. The midp cycle is generally thought of as the secular trend, norm,mean,avera “happy medium,” and generally as being in some sense as “rightand

The extremes of the cycle,on the other hand, are thought of as excesses to be returned from, and generally they are. Whilethe thing cycling tends to spendmuch of the time aboveor belowit, eventual movement back in the direction of the mean is usually the rule. movement from either a high or a low extreme back toward the often described as “regression toward the mean,” a powerful and reasonable tendency in most walksof life. But, thinking back to the stageslisted above, it can also be seen that the cyclical pattern consists as much of movement from the reasonable midpoint toward potentially imprudent extreme (phases b, e and h in the prece it does going from an extreme back toward the midpoint (a, d The rational midpoint generally exertsa kind of magnetic pull, bri thing that’s cycling back from an extreme in the direction of “norm usually doesn’t stay at normal for long, as the influences respo swingtoward the midpoint invariably continue in force and thus cause swingback from an extreme to proceed through the midpoint and further, toward the opposite extreme. It’s important to recognize and accept the dependability of thi details vary—the timing, duration, speed and power of the swin importantly,the reasons for them—and that’s likely what’s behind Twai remark regarding history not repeating. But the underlying dynamics usually similar. In particular, that means the swingback from a almost never halts at the midpoint . . . regardless of how “appropriate” the midpoint may be. The continuation of the move the midpoint and toward the opposite extreme is highly depe example, markets rarelygo from “underpriced” to “fairly priced” there. Usually the fundamental improvement and rising optimism that markets to recover from depressed levelsremain in force, causing continue right through “fairly priced” and on to “overpriced.” to happen, but usually it does. ∾ Cycles have more potential to wreakhavocthe further they progress midpoint—i.e., the greater the aberrations or excesses. If the swin one extreme goes further, the swingback is likely to be more viole more damage is likely to be done, as actions encouraged by the operation at an extreme prove unsuitable for life elsewhere in the In other words, the potential for havocincreases as the moveme from the midpoint increases: as economies and companies do “too well” stock pricesgo “too high.” Advances are followed by mere corrections bull markets by bear markets. But booms and bubbles are follo more harmful busts, crashes and panics.

∾ What is this midpoint around whichthingscycle? As I said, it’s astride a secular trend. For example, an economy’s gross domestic may exhibit a secular annual growth rate of, say, 2% for growth will be faster in some years and slower—even negative—in The performance in individual years is usually part of a cycle underlying secular trend. Importantly, the secular growth rate may be subject to a longer-term, more gradual one. You have to step back further to example, societies tend to follow long-term patterns of rise and the Roman Empire, for example—and the short term we talk abou ups and downs around the long-term trend (see pages 48–51). The same can be true for industries. But since long-term cycles oc decades and centuries, ratherthan quarters and years—and thus they can entail time frames that exceed any observer’s lifetime—they can be detectin real time and hard to factorinto a decision process. Here’s what I wrote on the subject in my memo “The Lo 2009): There’s an old story about a groupof blind men walking down th road in India who come upon an elephant. Each one touches a different part of the elephant—the trunk,the leg, the tail or th and comes up with a different explanation of what he’d encoun based on the small part to whichhe was exposed. We are those b men. Even if we have a good understanding of the events w we don’t easilygain the overall view needed to put them togethe to the time we see the wholein action, our knowledge is li parts we’vetouched. . . . . . . some of the most important lessons concern the study and remember the events of the past and (b) be conscio cyclical nature of things. Up close, the blind man may mistake elephant’s leg for a tree—and the shortsightedinvestor may think a uptrend (or a downtrend) will go on forever. But if we s view the long sweep of history, we should be able to b the long-term cycle also repeats and understand wherewe stand in it ∾ This is a good time for me to make one of the most important nature of cycles. Most people think of cycles in terms of aboveand recognize them as a series of events. And most people

that these events regularly follow each other in a usual sequence: are followed by downswings, and then eventually by new upswings. But to have a full understanding of cycles, that’s not enough. the life of a cycle shouldn’t be viewed merely as each being next, but—much more importantly—as each causing the next. For example: As the phenomenon swings toward an extreme, this movem energy, whichit stores. Eventually its increased weight makes for the swingto continue further from the midpoint, and it maximum beyond whichit can no longer proceed. Eventually it stops moving in that direction. And once it does, then pulls it back in the direction of the central tendency with the energy it has amassed powering the swingback. And as the phenomenon in question moves from the extrem toward the midpoint, the swingimparts momentum to it that overshoot the midpoint and keep moving toward the opposite In this way, a cycle in the economic or investment worldconsists series of events that give rise to their successors. The process descr three bullet pointsabovesounds like a physical one, governed by force as gravity and momentum.But as I mentioned aboveand we’ll see the most important deviations from the general trend—and the variation those deviations’ timing, speed and extent—are largely produced by fluctuations in psychology. If you consider the human psyche—rather than physical attribute the source of much of the energy or momentum,these three point good job of also explaining the swings and oscillations that investors challenged to deal with. In the chapters that follow, some of the important content will consist of descriptionsof ways in whichthe each type of cycle generate their successors. Owing to this view of cycles as progressions of causative contains several step-by-stepaccounts of progressions that took place past. The goal with each progression will be to illustrate what caused event in the progression,what it meantin the progression,and how it contributed to the events that followed. The recounting of progression feel repetitive, and some of the ones covered actually will be touch than once (although with reference to different aspects). But hopefully real-world examples will help readers achieve the goal of understand cycles and how to position for them. ∾

It’s extremely important to note this causal relationship: that the talking about consist of series of events that cause the ones that it’s equally significant to note that while cycles occur in a varie to these serial events, cyclical developments in one area also influ in others. Thus the economic cycle influences the profit cycle.Corporate announcements determined by the profit cycle influence investor attitudes. Investor attitudes influence markets. And developments in markets the cycle in the availability of credit . . . whichinfluences econ companies and markets. Cyclical events are influenced by both endogenousdevelopments (including the cyclical events that precede them)as well exogenous developments (events occurring in other areas). Manyof the latter from all—are parts of other cycles. Understanding these causative intera isn’t easy, but it holds much of the key to understanding and copin investment environment. It must be understood that while I will describe cycles as sep discrete, this is not entirely realistic. I will provide a smoo describes the operation of each type of cycle in isolation. I will impression that each cycle has an independentlife of its own. I may the impression that the swingin a given direction of one type of before the start of a corresponding or resultant swingin a type—i.e., that they operate sequentiallyand independently. In other word will attempt to discuss each type of cycle in isolation . . they don’t operate in isolation. My description mightsuggest that the different cycles are independ each other and self-contained. It may seem that something happens in A, whichaffects cycle B, whichaffects cycle C, whichmightfeed all back to influence cycle A. This may give the impression that cycle A hold after it has influenced cycle B, and while cycle B’s influence on takes place.But that’s not the way it is. The interrelationships among the various cycles are nowhere ne my descriptionswill be. The various cycles operate on their own, also continuously affect each other. I try to tease out the various mind and treat them separately, and that is the way this book will be organized. But the well-behaved, isolated cycles I’ll describe are analytical concept. In life they’re really a jumble of interrelated that can’t be separated entirely. A affects B (and C), and B and they all influence D, whichinfluences all of them. They’re all with each other, but we must think about them in an orderly fashion to understand cycles and their effects. ∾

Finally, perhaps under the heading of “miscellany,” I want to more thingsabout the nature of cycles that are essential for a understanding (starting here with a few observations from my Nove 2001 memo, “You Can’t Predict. You Can Prepare.”): Cycles are inevitable. Everyonce in a while, an upor for a long time and/or to a great extreme, and people time it’s different.” They cite the changes in geopolitics, institutions, technology or behavior that have rendered the “old rules”obsolete. make investment decisions that extrapolate the recenttrend. But then it usually turns out that the old rules do still apply, and the In the end, trees don’t grow to the sky, and few thingsgo to most phenomena turn out to be cyclical. Cycles’ clout is heightened by the inability of investors to past. As John Kenneth Galbraith says, “extreme brevity of the memory” keeps market participants from recognizing the recurring nature of these patterns, and thus their inevitability: Whenthe same or closely similar circumstances occur again, sometimes in only a few years,they are hailedby a new, oft youthful, and always supremely self-confident generation as a brilliantly innovative discovery in the financial and larger economic world. Therecan be few fields of human endeavor whichhistory counts for so little as in the worldof fin experience, to the extentthat it is part of memory at all dismissed as the primitive refuge of those who do not ha insight to appreciate the incredible wonders of the present. Short History of Financial Euphoria, 1990) Cycles are self-correcting, and their reversal is not necessarily on exogenous events. The reason they reverse (rather than forever) is that trendscreatethe reasons for their own reversal. like to say success carries within itself the seeds of failure the seeds of success. Seen through the lens of human perception, cyclesare often viewed less symmetricalthan they are. Negative price fluctuations are called “volatility,” while positive price fluctuations are called“profit.” Collapsing markets are called“selling panics,” while surges receiv more benign descriptions(but I think they may best be seen as panics”; see tech stocks in 1999, for example). Commentators “investor capitulation” at the bottom of market cycles, capitulation at the top, when previously prudent investors throwin towel and buy.

Although this may be underestimated and overlooked, in my experien financial cycles generally are largely symmetrical. Everycycle move an “other side,” meaning every upswing is invariably followed by— perhaps better said, leads to—a downswing,and vice versa. “Boom/bust”—that’s a phenomenon that’s widely talkedabout and generally understood, and it’s a good illustration of cycle symmetry. Most people understand that busts follow booms. Somewhat fewer grasp the that the busts are caused by the booms. From the latter, it make booms usually won’tbe followed by modest, gradual and painl adjustmentsand (b) on the other hand, we’re unlikely to have a bust haven’t had a boom. It must be noted, however, that this symmetry only applies de direction, not necessarily to the extent, timing or pace of move the point that Nick Train makes—you’ll meet him in the next chapter.) an upward movement may be followed by a downward movement greater or lesser magnitude. The downward turn may commence just after apex is reached, or thingsmay stay at a high for a long time to correct. And, perhaps most importantly,it can take years for a grow to its full extent. But the bust that follows may seem like freight train; as my long-time partner Sheldon Stone says, “The air of the balloon much faster than it went in.” Let’s returnto what Mark Twain is supposed to have said: “History repeatitself, but it does rhyme.” Grasping this concept is absolutely an understanding of cycles. What Twain must have meantby this if he indeed was responsible for it—is that whereas the details event to another in a given category of history (say, the ascen demagogues), the underlying themes and mechanisms are consistent. This is true of cycles in finance, and absolutely true of fin you’llsee later, the Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08 occurred large because of the issuance of a huge number of unsound sub-p and that took place in turn because of an excess of optimism, risk aversion, and an overly generous capital market, whichled behavior surroundingsub-prime mortgages. Thus the narrow-minded literalist would say, “I’ll definitely turn cautious the next time mortgage finan made readily available to unqualified home buyers.” But that aspect Crisisneed never recur for the lessons of the Global Financial Crisi valuable. Rather, the themes that provide warning signals in are the general ones: that excessive optimism is a dangerous thing aversion is an essential ingredient for the market to be safe; generous capital markets ultimately lead to unwise financing, and danger for participants.

In short, the details are unimportantand can be irrelevant. But the are essential, and they absolutely do tend to recur. Understanding that tendency—and being able to spot the recurrences—is one of the most important elements in dealing with cycles. Finally, I want to bring in the definition of insanity that Al credited with: “doing the same thing over and over and expecting diffe results.” Whenpeople investin thingsafter they’ve been carried aloft “everyone knows” they’re both flawless and underpriced—thinking they high returns without risk of loss—that’sinsanity. Such beliefs have defrocked in the aftermath of every bubble. But many people—either that bubbles tend to be followed by crashes, or blinded to eagerness to get rich quickly—buy into the next one nevertheless. Securities and markets that have benefitted from fabulous appreciation much more likely to succumb to a cyclical correction than they are appreciate ad infinitum. Try telling that to the eager investor who “it’s different this time.” ∾ The length of this chapter and the large variety of topicscove indicative of the multi-faceted and challenging nature of cycles. reason, cycles have to be understood both analytically and intuitively. many other aspects of investing, those who possess the latter ability addition to the former will go the furthest. Can an intuitive taught? Yes, to some degree, but most fully to those who start off of insight. In short, some people just tend to “get it” (whatever and some don’t. Courses in accounting, finance and security analysis will equip the with the technical knowledge that is necessary for success but, in those courses are far from sufficient. The main element missing from an understanding of cyclical phenomena and how they develop as this book. Some cues will be foundin the newlyestablished fields of behavioral economics and behavioral finance, and I commend them to attention. Psychology is an essential component in understanding the that matter so much to investors. The greatest lessons regarding cycles are learned through ex in the adage“experience is what you got when you didn’tget what you wanted.” I know so much more about this today than I did when I young security analyst at First National City Bank 48 years ago. However, since we usually see only one majorcycle per decade, an who’sgoing to rely solelyon the amassing of experience for his progr better have a lot of patience. I hope what you read here will add understanding and speed your education.

The ancient Greekhistorian Thucydides statedin History of the Peloponnesian War that he would be satisfied “if these wordsof judged usefulby those who want to understand clearly the events happened in the past and which(human nature being what it is) time or other and in much the same ways, be repeated in the futur good description of my goal here as well.