III THE REGULARITY OF CYCLES This effort to explain life through the recognition of patterns—and thus to come up with winning formulas—is complicated, in la because we live in a worldthat is beset by randomnessand in people don’t behave the same from one instance to the next, e when they intend to. The realization that past events were largely affected by these things—andthus that futureevents aren’tfully predictable—is unpleasant, as it makes life less subject to anticipation, rule-makingand rendering safe. In the fall of 2013, in response to something I’d written in Important Thing, I received an email from Nick Train of Lindsell London-based money management firm. Nick took issue with my use word “cycle” to describe phenomena like those I’m discussing here. Nick I had a healthy email colloquy regarding the issue and met for spirited lunch. By the time the main course arrived, it had become clear tha motivated Nick to write was his conviction that for something to be as cyclical, its timing and extenthave to be regular and thus radio cycle or sine wave,for example, rises and falls in a regular, pattern, with the same amplitude, frequency and ending point every time. Dictionary.com defines a cycle in physics as “a complete alt whicha phenomenon attains a maximum and minimum value,retur final value equal to the original one,” and a cycle in mathematics permutationof a set of elements that leaves the original cycli elements unchanged.” In other words, these scientific and mathematic cycles follow patterns so regular that they end up back wher that happens because the timing and path of the fluctuations is same. Score one for Nick. But economies, companies and markets—and certainly investors’ psyches and behavior—are not regular in this way. I asserted at our

Nick eventually agreed, that thingscan be cyclical without exhibiting degree of consistency.It’s all a matter of your definition of Here’s part of what I wrote to Nick to follow up: What I claim is that, usually, thingsrise and fall. Most natural th have a birth/death cycle,and investor psychology has a very pronounced cycle of rising optimism (and price appreciation) followed by rising pessimism (and price declines). You may think that’s simplistic and unhelpful. But one of the main pointsis that when something rises, investors have a tendency to think it’ll never fall (and vice versa). Betting against those tendencies can be v profitable. . . . Little in the world—andcertainly not in the investment world—is regular enough in time to profit from applying a mechanistic p But that doesn’t mean you can’t take advantage of up-and-down cycles. . . . I don’t think fluctuations have to end up back wherethey started be calleda cycle.Manycycles end up higher than they started— is, they are cycles around an underlying secular uptrend—but doesn’t mean they’re not cyclical, or that it’s not desirable to up-cycle and avoid the down-cycle,as opposed to staying on throughout. The Cambridge Dictionary’s definition of a cycle—for use in the non-technical world—is “a groupof events that happen in a one following the other, and are often repeated.” I’m happywith that one; reflects the sense in whichI think about cycles and oscillations in ∾ WhileI don’t agree with Nick Train’s objection that the irregularity of phenomena I’m discussing disqualifies them from being described as cyclical, there is a great deal to be understood about their irregularity and what learned from it. The most important thing to note here is that, as I said in the the thingsI call cycles do not stem completely—or sometimes at the operation of mechanical,scientific or physical processes. They woul much more dependable and predictable if they did—but much less potentially profitable. (This is because the greatest profits come from seeing than othersdo, and if cycles were totally dependable and predictable would be no such thing as superiority in seeing them.) Some underlying principle (and sometimes not), but much variation is attributable the role of humans in creating cycles. The involvement of

process enables their emotionand psychology-induced tendencies to influence cyclical phenomena.Chance or randomnessalso plays a big some cycles, and human behavior contributes to their existence, too. are a big part of the reason these cycles exist, but also—alon randomness—for their inconsistency and thus their undependability. ∾ We humans have to live in the real world. As described earlie patterns and rules that will permit us to live more easilyand profi Perhaps it started with early man’sexperience with daily and annual He may have learned the hard way that it was unsafe to visit at the time of day when mother lions went there with their cubs. And he learned through experimentation that certain crops did better when in the spring than in the fall. The more absolute the rules, the be. It now seemsto be ingrained in the human brain to look patterns. But this effort to explain life through the recognition of patterns— to come up with winning formulas—is complicated, in large part, live in a worldthat is beset by randomnessand in whichpeople the same from one instance to the next, even when they intend to. realization that past events were largely affected by these things—an that futureevents aren’tfully predictable—is unpleasant, as it makes subject to anticipation, rule-makingand rendering safe. Thus people for explanations that would make events understandable . . beyond that whichis appropriate.This is as true in investing as aspects of life. I foundsome interesting statements on this subject in The Drunkar Walk, a 2008 book about randomnessby Leonard Mlodinow, a faculty member at Caltech. Here’s the first, from his book’s prologue: To swim against the current of human intuition is a d The human mind is built to identify for each event a definite and can therefore have a hard time accepting the influence of unrelated or random factors. And so the first step is to r success or failure sometimes arises neither from great skill nor f great incompetence but from, as the economist Armen Alchian w “fortuitous circumstances.” Random processes are fundamental in nature and are ubiquitous in our everyday lives, yet most people not understand them or think much about them. In a chapter about the unpredictability and capriciousness of su movie industry, Mlodinow describes producer William Goldman’s view

the subject: Goldman didn’tdeny that there are reasons for a film’sbox office performance. But he did say that those reasons are so comple path from green light to opening weekend so vulnerable to unforeseeable and uncontrollable influences that educated guesses about an unmade film’spotential aren’tmuch better than the flips of a coin. Mlodinow goes on to discuss how random elements apply to a baseball: The result of any particular at bat (that is, an opportunity for s depends primarily on the player’s ability, of course. But it depends on the interplay of many other factors: his health; th the sun, or the stadium lights; the quality of the pitches the game situation; whether he correctly guesses how the pitcher throw; whether his hand-eye coordination worksjust perfectly a takes his swing; whether that brunette he met at the bar k too late or the chili-cheese dog with garlic fries he had for breakfa soured his stomach. If not for all the unpredictable factors, would either hit a home run on every at bat or fail to d at bat]. We know that a variety of factors influence outcomes in all many of them are random or unpredictable. That certainly includes developments in economics and investing. Even if one’s income is individual’spropensity to consume may be affected by the weather, whichcountry wins the World Cup (and that, in turn, by how a off a defender’s shin). A company may issue a favorable earnings whether its stock rises or falls as a result will be influenced by competitors do, whether the central bank chooses that week for an rate increase, and whether the earnings announcement comes in week in the market. Giventhis degree of variability, the cycles with certainly aren’tregular and can’t be reduced to reliable decis rules. I can give you an example from the worldof high yield bonds: I’ve foundquite annoying. At one point in my experience, a view arose bondstend to default around the second anniversary of their issua that would be a very helpful bit of knowledge: to avoid defau would have to do is sell all bondsas they approach that anniv back the ones that have survived it. (Of course, this rule ignores

of what price sellers would receive for bondsthat are nearing date—since everyone knows it poses risk—and how much they’d have to buy back the ones that have cleared it.) Perhaps a cluster of second anniversary defaults occurred aro that notion became popular. But coincidence is very different from Is that phenomenon dependable? What were the reasons for it? repeat? Should you bet on it? In particular, the history of probably covered only twenty years or so at that time, making whether the experience and sample size were sufficient to justify that observation.Rather than intellectual rigor, I preferto think the two-y rule was based more on people’s thirst for simple, helpful rules, and excessive tendency to extrapolate without any real foundation. I think it would be better to recognize that bondsdefault in wide variety of influences—like those that contribute to the success of a hitter in baseball—and that most defaults have absolutely nothi with the number of years that have elapsed since the bondswere issue invertMark Twain’s purported remark, history may rhyme, but it repeats exactly. ∾ I’m firmly convinced that markets will continue to rise and fall, know (a) why and (b) what makes these movements more or less immi But I’m sure I’ll never know when they’re going to turn up or down they’ll go after they do, how fast they’ll move, when they’ll the midpoint, or how far they’ll continue on the opposite side. great deal to admit uncertainty about. I have found, however, that the little I do know about cycle tim me a great advantage relative to the majority of investors, who even less about cycles and pay less heed to them and their implication appropriate action. The advantage I’m talking about is probably all can achieve, but it’s enough for me. It’s been the source of that my Oaktree colleagues and I have enjoyed over the last 22 a lot of what I want to pass on in this book.