IV THE ECONOMIC CYCLE The output of an economy is the product of hours worked per hour; thus the long-term growth of an economy is determi primarily by fundamental factors like birth rate and the rate o productivity(but also by other changes in society and environment) Thesefactors usually change relatively little from year to year, a only gradually from decade to decade. Thus the average rate o growth is rathersteady over long periods of time. Giventhe relative stability of underlying secular growth, one be tempted to expect that the performance of economies w consistent from year to year. However, a number of factors a to variability, causing economic growth—even as it follows th underlying trendline on average—toalso exhibit annual variability. The economic cycle (also known—mostly in the past—as “the busine cycle”) provides much of the foundation for cyclical events in worldand the markets. The more the economy rises, the more likely it companies will expand their profits and stock markets will rise. I’ll briefly here on the factors that influence economic cycles. But I want to make the confession I volunteer whenever I discuss it a proudproclamation?): I’m no economist. I took courses in economics as both an undergraduate and a student. I think about economics. I deal with economics as a profe investor. And I consider myself to be largely an “economic most decisions for logical reasons based on the relationship between value,risk and potential return. But my thinking about economics is largely on common sense and experience, and I’m sure I’ll write thing with whichmany economists will disagree. (Of course, they also disagree with each other. The workings of economics are quite unclear and impr and thus it’s for good reason that it’s called“the dismal science.”) The main measure of an economy’s output is GDP, or gross do product, the total value of all goodsand services produced for final

economy. It can roughly be viewed as the result of multiplying hours people spendworking by the value of the output produced (Earlier in my careerit was calledgross national product, but that gone out of style. The distinction between the two lies in the treatm foreign manufacturers operating in a given country: GDP includes that country’s output, while GNP does not.) The main questions most people (and certainly most investors) care ab with regard to the economy are whether we’ll have growth or given year, and what the rate of change will be. Both of these are of what I call the short-term economic cycle.(I’ll introduce other considerations shortly.) Whenwe think about U.S. GDP growth in a given year, we usually with an assumption in the range of 2% to 3% or so and then for the specific circumstances. But the starting point for each year’ growth is invariably positive. For example, as last year beganthere of discussion about the rate at whichGDP would grow. The optimists it’d be nearly 3%, and the pessimists thought it mightnot reach about everyone thought it would be positive. The official defin recession is two consecutive quarters of negative growth, and very thought GDP growth would fall into negative territory—last year thereafter. Long-Term Economic Trends Manyinvestors are concerned about year-to-yeareconomic growth: high or low, positive or negative. The developments they’re asking abou term considerations. They’re important, but they’re not everything. In long run their importance fades and long-term considerations become more relevant. As I mentioned early on, most of the cycles that attract inv consist of oscillations around a secular trend or central tende oscillations matter a great deal to companies and markets in the changes in regard to the underlying trendline itself will prove to greater overall significance. The oscillations around the trend will in the long run (admittedly after causing much elation or distress years), but changes in the underlying trend will make the biggest our long-term experience. In January 2009, I wrote a memo entitled “The Long View” this subject. I’m going to quote extensively from it here.

First, I described a number of “salutary secular trends” tha markets had been ridingover the preceding decades. I’ll list them below omit the descriptionsthat accompanied them in the memo: macro environment corporate growth the borrowing mentality popularization of investing investor psychology The developments enumerated aboveconstituted a strong tailwind behind the economy and the markets over the last several d and they produced a long-term secular uptrend. Yet, despite the underlying uptrend, there’s been no straight li economy and markets were punctuated every few years by cyclical bouts of short-term fluctuation. Cycles around the trendline made f frequent ups and downs. Most were relatively small and brief, but in the 1970s, economic stagnation set in, inflation reached 16%, th average stock lost almost half its value in two years,and Busines Week magazine ran a cover story trumpeting “The Deathof Equities” (August 13, 1979). No, my forty years in the market haven’t wine and roses.

From time to time we saw better economies and worse—slowdown and prosperity, recession and recovery. Markets, too, rose and fell. Thesefluctuations were attributable to normal economic cycles and to exogenous developments (such as the oil embargo in 1973 and th emerging market crisis in 1998). The Standard & Poor’s 5 few down years in the period from 1975 to 1999, but none in w lost more than 7.5%.On the upside, however, 16 of those 25 y showed returns above15%, and seven times the annual gain exceed 30%. Despite the ups and downs, investors profited overall, inves became a national pursuit, and Warren Buffett, one of A richest men, got that way by buying common stocks and w companies. A serious general uptrend was underway, reaching it zenithin 2007. . . . Until mid-2007, my 39 years of experience as a money mana had been limited to part of the long-term story. Perhaps what lo like an underlying long-term uptrend should have been viewed in as the positive part of a long-term cycle incorporating downs as ups. Only when you step back . . . can you gaugeits f proportions.

The main thing I want to discuss here is my realization that th cycles in the long-term trend, not just short-term cycles around we’vebeen livingthrough the positive phase of a big one. Before I progress to a discussion of the short-term economi most investors concern themselves with, I’m going to spendsome more time on the long term: the factors that shape it and the current outlo that I’ll turn to the matter of the short-term economic cycle. I have mentioned that one of the main determinants of each ye economic output is the number of hours worked. In turn, the fundamental factorunderlying increases in hours worked is population growth. Growth in the population means there are more people year to make and sell products (and also more people to buy and them, encouraging production).More production equals more GDP. If the population is growing, hours worked tend to grow, and so does GDP births are one of the main reasons for the usual presumption that growth will be positive. On the other hand, if the population is positive GDP growth faces a significant headwind. Population growth doesn’t vary much from year to year. The number people of child-bearing age doesn’t change much in the short does their tendency to have children. Thesethingsdo change over decad longer, however, so they cause changes in long-term population. What are the kinds of the thingsthat can alter a nation’s birth rat average number of children each couple has)? rules like China’s longstanding but recently revised one-child

wars (like World War II, whichdepressed the birth rate but gave the Baby Boomwhen it ended), economic conditions, which, among other things, alter people’s about whether they can affordto have children, and socialmores, like the recenttendency of young Americans to family formation Changes in birth rates generally take place over long periods of tim when they do, they require years to affect GDP growth. Take China’s child policy, for example. You mightsay the shift was sudden: one 2015 the policy was in full force, and the next day its phase-out announced. True as far as it goes. But while people who already certainly mighthave gotten busy producing another on that new day, take roughly twenty years for that second child to become a able to contribute to China’s economic output. Thus the bottom year-to-yearchanges in GDP are unlikely to be attributed significantl changes in the birth rate. The other principal element in the GDP equation—the value of the produced in each hour of labor—is determined by “productivity.” Chan productivityare fundamental determinants of changes in the longof GDP. Whatever the rate of population growth mightbe, GDP will faster if productivityis rising or slower if it’s falling. And looki derivatives, the rate of growth in GDP will accelerate if the rate productivityis rising and decelerate if it’s falling. It’s all just math Changes in productivity, like changes in birth rate, take place in degrees and gradually, and they require long periods to take effec primarily from advances in the productive process. The first big gains occurred during the Industrial Revolution of roughly 1760 to 1830 human labor was replaced by machines driven by steamand wate when large factories replaced the work that was done less efficiently in shops and at home. The second majorgains occurred in the late 20th centuries, when electricity and automobilesreplaced older and lessefficient formsof power and transportation. The third majorchange in the latter half of the 20th century, when computers and other form automated control beganto take the place of humans in guiding machinery. And, of course, the fourthwave is underway now, during InformationAge, as massive advances in information acquisition, storage application—and such activities as metadata and artificial intelligence—are permitting tasks to be accomplished that weren’t dreamed of in Remember, each of these changes took place gradually, over decades. Ea made a massive difference in GDP, but even with these, there weren’t accelerations and decelerations from year to year. The rate of gain

productivitytends to remain relatively steady for years,and certainly short-term cycles of economic recession and recovery generally aren’ attributed to changes in it. It’s clear that trendsin hours worked and in output per hour co determine long-term trendsin national output. But what factors produ changes in those two? Here’s a partial, indicative list: Demographic movements—The migration of millions of Chine farms to cities is an example of what I’m talking about here. increasing the availability of workers, this migration fueled China as a site of low-cost manufacturing, and it is contributing expansion of China’s consumer class. Another example is immig from Latin America to the United States. America, like other nations, is experiencing a declining birth rate. But ongoing from south of the border—some of it illegal—takes the place expanding the U.S.’s supply of productive labor and rate of consumption. Determinants of inputs—The number of hours worked can from the number of people working, and certainly from the interested in working. “Workforceparticipation” reflects the percentage of people o working age who are either employed or looking for work. The unemployment rate (the percentage of people participating the workforce who don’t have a job) rises and falls in respons changes in consumer and business spending (and thus to c demand for goods, and in the need for workers to p The number of hours worked by each person with a jo varieswith economic conditions—businesses shorten work weeks when demand for goodsis low, and they authorize overtime w demand is high (until demand is strong enough to c hiringor another shift). Aspiration—The profit motive and the desireto live better are among the forcesthat drive workers (and thus societies) to work harder produce more. It mightbe tempting to think of these thingsas but they aren’t. For example, the profit motive was prettymuch from the economic system under the Soviets, and the willingness more is constrained in other economies (to wit, I’ve watched worke clock out at European banks—not to prove that they had worked 5:00 as in the U.S., but ratherthat they had left by 5:00 and exceeded the 35-hour work week).

Education —The deterioration of public education in the to have a negative effect on workers’ ability to contribute economy in the future, as well as their ability to genera incomes with whichto consume. Thesenegative trendsare likely to work counter to the positive effects from the influxof immig Technology —Innovation causes new businesses to come into but brings about the demise of old ones. It both creates eliminates them. In short, it provides a hyper-example of the nature of economic evolution: it creates winners and losers technologies overtake human effort as well as old technologies are not in any way “safe,” as they, too, can be displaced today’s terminology—disrupted. Technologyepitomizes the pattern rise and fall, life and death . . . and rebirth. Automation —The ability to replace human labor with particularly interesting factor. On the one hand, automation can be viewed as additive to the economic cycle,since it increases or the amount of output that is generated per hour of mechanization of agriculture, for instance, allowed many fewer farme to produce much more food at much lower cost than ever before. the other hand, automation decreases the hours of labor applied to production. Today we see factories run by just a few worke years ago mighthave had a hundred. Thus the net effect of autom on GDP mightbe neutral or positive but, since it has the eliminate jobs, automation mighthave the effect of reducing employment, and thus incomes, and thus consumption. Globalization —The integration of nations into a worldecono add to total worldeconomic output, in part because of benefi specialization, or it may not, leaving it a zero-sum (or exercise. But clearly, globalization can have differential effects individual nations’ economies (and createwinners and loserswithin nation). The massive increase in the number of factory described abovecertainly accelerated China’s economic growth over last thirty years by permitting it to become a leading export of the world. However, that same trend caused developed nation a lot of goodsfrom Chinathat they otherwise mighthave produced themselves, thus curtailing their own GDP. The few million manufacturing jobs estimated to have been lost to Chinasince 2000 certainly made U.S. economic growth lower than it otherwise would have been, although one would need to take into account the importing low-priced goodsfrom Chinato estimate the total impact the U.S. economy.

∾ The U.S. was blessed with an intact infrastructure coming out of II, and it benefitted greatly from the Baby Boomin post-war birth created a massive upsurge in economic growth. American produ the best in the world, and American corporations were wildly the yet-to-globalize world, American workers could remain the bestfrom competitionfrom goodsproduced more cheaply elsewhere. Improving management techniques and rapid increases in productivitywere further contributors. Thus secular economic growth in the U.S. was rapid contributingto demand for consumption and thus creating a virtu from whichmany benefitted . . . but it was not one that could continue unchanged. More recently, economic growth appears to have slowed in the well as elsewhere). Is this a short-term cyclical change relative underlying long-term trend, or a change in the long-term trend itself take many years before we know definitively.But there has arisena schoo thought blaming it on “secular stagnation”—that is, a fundamenta the long-term trend. Gainsin population and productivityhave declined in the U.S., as the have in other developed nations. Taken together, these two thingssugg GDP will grow more slowly in the U.S. in the coming years than years following World War II. It is postulated that the majoradva productivityof the recentpast will not be replicated in the future. the availability of much-cheaper labor elsewhere makes it unlikely U.S. will be able to compete on price to produce the manufactur requires; this has obviously negative implications in the U.S. for among less-skilled and less-educated Americans, income inequality, and standards of livingrelative to people in other countries. Theseissue course, played an obvious part in the 2016 presidential election. Changes in population growth and productivitygrowth can require to take effect, but clearly they can affect countries’ economic grow the 20th century, the U.S. surpassed Europe as an economic powe Japan seemed to sprint forward in the 1970sand 1980s, threatening over the world, until the late ’80s, when it fell back into negligible The emerging markets—and especially China—were the site of rapid over the last few decades, and while their growth is slower at they may well outgrow the developed worldin the next few decades. has human resources that can make it a rapid-growth economy increase its efficiency and reduce corruption. And frontier nations and Bangladesh stand behind the emerging nations, waiting for their rapid growers.

Societies rise and fall, and they speed up and slow down in terms of economic growth relative to each other. This underlying trend in grow clearly follows a long-term cycle,although the short-run ups and around it are more discernible and thus more readily discussed. Short-Term Economic Cycles As I mentioned earlier, economic forecasters and the consumers of product are usually preoccupiedby the rate of GDP growth in year or two. In other words, they’re concerned about the growth in the upward swingof the short-term economic cycle and its durat well as whether it’ll go negative for two quarters in the down thus be termed a recession. Thesethingsrepresent short-term fluctuation around the long-term growth trend as illustrated a few pages back factors that produce the long-term trend change little from quarter and year to year, why should short-term changes be of great conc why should they even occur? Why isn’t there just growth at the —say2%—every year? Thesequestions provide a good opportunity to introduce some of thi book’s protagonists: psychology,emotion and decision-making processes. Birthsand productivityoften tend to be viewed as independentand almo mechanical variables. Birthsresult from procreation,and the reasons for it and the rate at whichit takes place are usually quite steady over Likewise, the rate of change in the level of productivity—in outpu labor—is viewed as being dictated largely by technological gains dissemination. In other words, although economies are made up of level of economic growth isn’t thought to be highly reflective people’s ups and downs. But, in fact, it is. Whilethe long-term trend sets the potential ec growth rate, the actuallevel of each year’sGDP will vary relative to whichthe trend dictates . . . largely because of the invol Birth rate may determine the long-term trendsin the number of ho worked, but other factors can introduce variation in the short run. willingness to work is not constant. Theremay be times when conditions discourage people from seeking a place in the workforce, as previ mentioned, and also times when worldevents alter the level of consumptio The most obvious example is the ability of worldevents to discourages economic activity. The sub-prime mortgage crisis and financial institution meltdown that reached its apex with the bankruptcy of Lehm Brothers in September 2008 discouragedconsumers from buying, investors

from providing capital, and companies from building factories and expa workforces. Thesecutbacks occurred even among people who hadn’t jobs, suffered home foreclosure or seen declines in the value of their portfolios. Thesedevelopments quickly affected the overall economy, result was a serious recession lasting from December 2007 to June If the number of workers working and the amount they ea constant, we mightexpect the amount they spendon consumption similarly constant. But it isn’t. Spending fluctuates more than employmen and earnings because of variation in something called“the marginal propensity to consume”: of every additional dollarearned, it determines percentage that will go to consumption. Because this propensity is the short run, consumption can vary independently of income. Earners may choose to spenda higher percentage of their ea consumption because: the daily headlines are favorable; they believe election results presage a stronger economy, or lower taxes; consumer credit has become more readily available; asset appreciation has made them feel richer; or their team won the World Series. The fourthof these factors—the so-called “wealth effect”—is particula noteworthy.Asset owners (a) are probably unlikely to fund consumptio selling their stocks or homes and (b) should recognize that can prove ephemeral and thus aren’ta good reason to alter spending Yet asset appreciation does tend to lead them to spendmore. This phenomenon demonstrates the contributionof psychology to behavior, behavior to short-term economic variation. It’s particularly important in this vein to note the extentto whichec expectations can be self-fulfilling. If people (and companies) belie futurewill be good, they’ll spendmore and investmore . . . and will be good, and vice versa.It’s my belief that most companies concluded that the Crisisof 2008 wouldn’t be followed by a V-shaped recov been the rule in the last few recessions. Thus they declined to expa factories or workforces, and the resulting recovery was modest and the U.S. (and even more anemic elsewhere). Another reason for short-term variation concerns inventories. Business may overestimate the demand for their products in a given perio increase production such that it exceeds the amount they can sell. may hold production constant but encounter surprisinglysoft demand. In either case, more goodswill be produced than sold. The excess will be

to inventories. That, in turn, is likely to cause production in subsequent periods to be adjusted downward until inventories are restored to levels. In this way, additions to and reductions in inventories often short-term ups and downs in economic output. Theseare only a few examples of the factors that can cause the economy to vary in a given quarter or year from the growth output that birth rate and productivitygains mightsuggest. They are the of factors that are not “mechanical” or reliable in nature. from human behavior, and thus they are uncertain and unpredictable. ∾ This leads me to add a few wordsabout economic forecasts. Manyinves predicate their actions on forecasts that they make themselves or obtai economists, banksor the media. And yet I doubt many such forecasts information that’s likely to add value and lead to investment success. (For more extensive discussion of “whatwe don’t know,” see chapter 14 Most Important Thing.) Here’s how I view the foundation for considering this issue: In investing, it’s easy to achieve performance that is equal average investor or a market benchmark. Since it’s easy to be average, real investment success must consis outperforming other investors and the averages. Investment success largely a relative concept, measured on the basis of relativ Simply being right about a coming event isn’t enough to ensure relative performance if everyone holds the same view and as everyone is equally right. Thus success doesn’t lie in being ratherin being more right than others. Similarly, one doesn’t have to be right in order to be succes wrong than others. Success doesn’t come from having a correct forecast, but superior forecast. Can such forecasts be obtained? Most economic forecasts consist of extrapolations of current lev long-term trends. And since the economy usually doesn’t depart those levelsand trends, most extrapolation forecasts turn out to be But those extrapolation forecasts are likely to be commonly shared, reflected in the market pricesfor assets, and thus not generators performance—even when they come true. Here’s how NobelPrize–winning economist Milton Friedman put it:

All these people see the same data, read the same material, and s their time tryingto guess what each other is going to say. [Their forecasts] will always be moderately right—and almost never of m use. The forecasts that are potentially valuable are those that correctly for deviation from long-term trendsand recentlevels. If a forecaster make non-conforming, non-extrapolation prediction that turns out to be correct, outcome is likely to come as a surprise to the other market they scramble to adjusttheir holdings to reflect it, the result is gains for the few who correctly foresaw it. There’s only one catch majordeviations from trend (a) occur infrequentlyand (b) are hard to correctly predict, most unconventional, non-extrapolation forecasts turn out be incorrect, and anyone who invests on their basis is usually belowaverage. So these are the possibilitiesI see with regard to economic for Most economic forecasts are just extrapolations. Extrapolations are usually correct but not valuable. Unconventional forecasts of significant deviation from trend would very valuable if they were correct, but usually they aren’t. forecasts of deviation from trend are incorrect and also not valuab A few forecasts of significant deviation turn out to be correc valuable—leadingtheir authors to be lionized for their acumen—bu hard to know in advance whichwill be the few right ones. Since overall batting average with regard to them is low, uncon forecasts can’t be valuable on balance. Thereare forecasters who famous for a singledramatic correct call, but the majority forecasts weren’t worthfollowing. Taken together, these three conclusions on economic forecasting aren’t very encouraging. Thus it’s not for nothing that John Kenneth Galb “We have two classes of forecasters: those who don’t know—and those who don’t know they don’t know.” Secular changes in long-term economic cycles are hard to pre correctness of forecasts of such changes is hard to assess. The of short-term economic cycles, too, are hard for any one person consistentlypredict better than others. It’s tempting to act on econ predictions, especially since the payoff for correct ones theoretically high. But the difficulty of being able to do so correctly and consi mustn’t be underestimated.

∾ Here is what I believe to be the bottom line on economic The output of an economy is the product of hours worke hour; thus the long-term growth of an economy is determined by fundamental factors like birth rate and the rate of gain (but also by other changes in society and environment). These usually change relatively little from year to year, and only gradua from decade to decade. Thus the average rate of growth over long periods of time. Only in the longest of time frame secular growth rate of an economy significantly speed up But it does. Giventhe relative stability of underlying secular growth, one tempted to expect that the performance of economies would consistent from year to year. However, a number of factors variability, causing economic growth—even as it follows the trendline on average—toalso exhibit annual variability. Thesefactor can perhaps be viewed as follows: Endogenous—Annual economic performance can be influenced b variation in decisions made by economic units: for consumers to spendor save, for example, or for businesses to expand o to add to inventories (calling for increased production) or s inventories (reducing production relative to what it mightotherwi have been). Often these decisions are influenced by the state o mind of economic actors, such as consumers or the manage businesses. Exogenous—Annual performance can also be influenced by ( man-made events that are not strictly economic, such as th occurrence of war; governmentdecisions to change tax rates o adjusttrade barriers; or changes caused by cartels in th commodities, or (b) natural events that occur without th involvement of people, such as droughts, hurricanes and earthquakes. Long-term economic growth is steady for long periods of subject to change pursuant to long-term cycles. Short-term economic growth follows the long-term trend on averag it oscillates around that trendline from year to year. People try hard to predict annual variation as a source investing profit. And on average they’re close to the truth time. But few people do it right consistently; few do it

than everyone else; and few correctly predict the majordeviations trend. ∾ I often find—miraculously—that just as I’m just about to conclude I’m writing, the perfect example pops up in real life or in Thus, as I was completing the first draft of this chapter on June was reported that a majority of votersin the United Kingdom leave the European Union. This decision was generally unexpected:the British pound and Lo stock market had strengthened in the days leading up to the London bookmakerswere giving odds that Brexit would be voted much for forecasting. This decision may have significant ramifications—economic, socialand political—for the U.K. and Europe, but also for the rest of the negative impact on the psyches of consumers, investors or busin may cause near-term economic growth to slow. So may increases in barriers and reduced global efficiency. Further, there’s a chance that this event (and follow-ons such as possible departure of Scotland and Northern Ireland from the Unite Kingdom) will alter long-term growth for the nations directly invol possibly for others. This event may be cited fifty years from now as changed the growth trajectory of majorparts of the worldeconomy, the whole, and as having contributed to a redirection of the Certainly there’s a good chance the economic environment wi in the years aheadfrom what it would have been if the Brexit the other way—that is, that Brexit will cause a turn in Britain’s economic cycle.We just can’t be sure how, to what extent, or what on effects on other economies will be.