V GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT WITH THE ECONOMIC CYCLE Extreme economic cyclicality is considered undesirable.Too much strength can kindle inflation and take the economy so high th recession becomes inevitable. Too much weakness, on the other hand, can cause companies’ profits to fall and can cost people their jo Thus it is part of the job of central bankers and Treasur manage cycles. Since cycles produce ups and downs that can be excessive, for dealing with them are counter-cyclical and applied with a c their own—ideally inverse to the economic cycle itself. However, li everything else involving cycles, managing them is far from easy. I weren’t, we wouldn’t see the extremes we do. In most of the world, capitalism and free markets are accepted constituting the best system for allocating economic resources and encouraging economic output. Nations have tried other systems, such socialism and communism, but in many cases they have either switched wholesale to or adopted aspects of free markets. Despite the widespread acceptance of the free-market system, markets rarelyleft entirely free. Government involvement takes many forms, from the enactment and enforcement of laws and regulations to direc participation in the economy through entities like the U.S.’s agencies. Perhaps the most important form of governmentinvolvement, however, comes in the attempts of central banksand national control and affect the ups and downs of economic cycles. Central Banks

Over the centuries, significant power and responsibility has been veste central bankssuch as the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank.Whereas in their primary roles may have been to issue currency and exchange it request for gold or silver, today central banksare concerned prim managing economic cycles. Early on, many central banksissued currency. As time passed an bankstook responsibility for cycles, their primary concern usually with inflation. In particular, the worldwent through periods of hype with inflation running in the hundreds of percent per year, as Germany during the post–World War I Weimar Republic. Thus centr turned to managing inflation. The goal wasn’t to eliminate inflat is accepted as (a) having a variety of salutary aspects unavoidable—but to control it. The reasons for inflation are somewhat mysterious and, like many oth processes described here, unreliable and sporadic. Sometimes a given set circumstances will give rise to inflation, and at other times the same circumstances will lead to more or less inflation, or to none at general, inflation is viewed as a result of a strong upwa economic cycle. Whenthe demand for goodsincreases relative to the supply, “demand-pull” inflation. Wheninputsto production such as labor and raw materials increase price, there can be “cost-push” inflation. Finally, when the value of an importing country’s currency declin relative to that of an exporting country, the cost of the can rise in the importing country. The cost of goodscan escalate for any of these reasons. That’s But, as I just said, sometimes these events can occur without an accompanying accelerationof inflation. And sometimes inflation can incre without these thingsbeing present. Thereis a large psychological comp that influences all of this. Since inflation results from economic strength, the efforts of ce bankers to control it amount to tryingto take some of the economy. They can include reducing the money supply, raising and selling securities. Whenthe private sectorpurchases securities from central bank, money is taken out of circulation; this tends to reduc demand for goodsand thus discourages inflation. Central bankers who strongly dedicated to keeping inflation under control are called“haw They tend to do the thingslisted abovesooner and to a greater

The problem, of course, is that actions of this kind are an They can accomplish the goal of keeping inflation under control, but restrain the growth of the economy, with effects that can be beneficial. The issue is complicatedby the fact that in the last few decades, central bankshave been given a second responsibility. In addition controlling inflation, they are expected to support employment, and, course, employment does better when the economy is stronger. So banksencourage this through stimulative actions such as increasing the money supply, decreasing interest rates, and injecting liquidity into economy by buying securities—as in the recentprogram of “qua easing.” Central bankers who focus strongly on encouraging empl lean toward these actions are called“doves.” The bottom line is that most central bankers have two jobs: to inflation, whichrequires restraining the growth of the economy, and support employment, whichcalls for stimulating economic growth. In words, their dual responsibilities are in opposition to each other, and their job requires a delicate balancing act. We have discussed the fact that the economy is cyclical, growing at some times and weakly (or contracting)at others. An economic tends to encourage employment but can cause inflation to accelerate. Stagnation or contraction, on the other hand, discourages inflation but can into employment. So the job of the central banker is to counter-cyclically: that is, to limit the extentof cycles, slowing in times of prosperity in order to keep inflation under control, and the economy during slowdowns to support employment. But just as the investor’s insight into cycles is limited an the central banker’s. His two tasks—stimulating the economy and it—obviously can’t both be done at once. Is it time for stimulus Whichever one is chosen, how much of it? If interest rates are have been since the Global Financial Crisis, in order to provide economic growth is weak (also as it has been), can rates be an increase in inflation without choking off the economy’s tepid cycles are challenging for investors to understand and predict, they easierfor central bankers to manage. Governments Governments have a greater variety of responsibilities than centr only a small portion of whichare related to the economic matte

central banks, they also are charged with stimulating the economy appropriate,albeit not directly with controlling inflation. In their work with the economy, treasuries, too, are concerned with regulating the cycle:not fast and not too slow. Governments’ main tools for managing the economic cycle are fiscal, defined as being concerned primarily with taxing and spending. Thus governments want to stimulate their countries’ economies, they can cut increase governmentspending and even distribute stimulus checks, maki more money available for spending and investment. On the other hand they think economies are growing so fast as to be at risk of setting the scene for a resulting slowdown—governments can incre or cut spending, reducing demand in their economies and thereby economic activity. The ultimate topic under this heading concerns national deficits. In distant past, most governments ran balanced budgets. In short, they able to spendmore money than they brought in through taxes (or But then the concept of national debt arose,and the ability to introduced the potential for deficits: that is, for governments to than they take in. I seem to remember from my youth that there was activedebate reg the propriety of countries having national debt, but we no longe resistance on that subject. It is generally accepted that countries money, although questions do arise from time to time about how much prudent. The answer generally seemsto be “not too much more than now.” The economic theory propoundedby John Maynard Keynes in the dwelled heavily on the role of governments vis-à-vis cycles. economics focuses on the role of aggregate demand in determinin of GDP, in contrast with earlier approaches that emphasized the role supply of goods. Keynes said governments should manage cycle by influencing demand. This, in turn, could be accomplished throu the use of fiscal tools, including deficits. Keynes urged governments to aid a weak economy by stimulati by running deficits. Whena government’s outgo—its spending—excee income—primarily from taxes—on balance it puts funds into the econ This encourages buying and investing. Deficits are stimulative, and thus Keynes considered them helpful in dealing with a weak economy. On the other hand, when economies are strong, Keynes said governm should run surpluses, spending less than they take in. This removes from the economy, discouraging spending and investment. Surpluses are contractionary and thus an appropriate response to booms. However, of surpluses to cool a thriving economy is little seen these days

to be a wet blanket when the party is going strong. And spend you bring in attracts fewer votes than do generous spending programs. surpluses have become as rare as buggy whips. ∾ Extreme economic cyclicality is considered undesirable.Too much strength can kindle inflation and take the economy so high that a reces inevitable. Too much weakness, on the other hand, can cause companies’ profits to fall and cost people their jobs. Thus it is part of the job of central bankers and Treasury manage cycles through the techniques described above. Since cycle ups and downs that can be excessive, the tools for dealing with counter-cyclical and applied with a cycle of their own—ideally inver economic cycle itself. However, like everything else involving cycles—such as knowing wh we are and what to do about them—managing them is far from easy. weren’t, we wouldn’t see the extremes we do.