VI THE CYCLE IN PROFITS The process that determines a company’s profits is complex a multivariate. The economic cycle has a profound effect on some companies’ sales but less on others. Largely because of differen operating and financial leverage, a given percentage change in s has a much greater impact on profits for some companies th others. These days, as I said earlier, the normal growth rate for U be about 2–3%per year. Growth mightcome in at 1% or so in or hit 4% or 5% in boom times (or during a recovery from annualized growth rate mighteven turn negative by a couple of tough times,and if it stays negative for two successive quarters, be recession. So there are fluctuations, but they are moderate: annual U.S. GDP almost always falls between 5% and minus2%, and even extremes are seen only once every decade at most. Does that mean companies’ profits also are stablefrom year to year? Fa from it. Profits can gain much more than 5% in good times and decli more than 2% in bad. They, too, follow a cycle—one that is influ economic cycle,but that rises and falls much more than the economy as whole. So profits are more volatile than GDP. The question is factors cause the profit cycle to perform differently from the economic First, the ups and downs of the economy absolutely are very im determiningthe rise and fall of corporate profits. More GDP means—m than anything else—more consumption, and thus stronger demand for That, in turn, means greater volumes sold and higher selling work and higher wages, and thus still more consumption. All those together mean increased revenues for businesses. By definition, the collective sales of all businesses are one and the GDP, and they reflect the same rate of change. But that doesn’t companies follow the same pattern.

Sales are responsive to the economic cycle in some industries, and in they aren’t. And some respond a lot, while othersrespond just a Sales of industrial raw materials and componentsare directly respon to the economic cycle.Whenbusiness collectively increases its output that is, when GDP expands—ittakes more chemicals, metals, plastic, energy, wire and semiconductors to do so, and vice versa. On the other hand, everyday necessities like food, beverages and medicine aren’thighly responsive to the economic cycle.People generally consume them regardless of what’s going on in the (But demand isn’t absolutely constant: people trade down in recess —buying cheaper food and eatingat home ratherthan in restaurants— and they trade up in times of prosperity. And, sadly,people who struggling financially may cut down even on their consumption of “necessities” when forced to choose between food, medications payments.) Demand for low-cost consumer items (like everyday clothing, newspapers and digital downloads) isn’t very volatile, while demand luxury goodsand vacation trips may be. Purchases of big-ticket “durable goods”—things like cars and homes individuals and trucksand factory equipment for businesses—are highly responsive to the economic cycle.First, the fact that they’re durabl means they last a long time, so replacementcan be deferred economic weakness. Second, because they cost a lot, they’re affordin bad times and easierto affordgood times.And third, businesses generally need more of them when business is good and less when isn’t. Thesethingsmake the demand for durables highly responsive the economic cycle. Demand for everyday services generally isn’t volatile. If they’r necessary (like transportation to work)and low-priced (like haircuts), demand won’tbe highly sensitive to changes in the econo services like these have a limited shelf life and can’t be stored have to be purchased continually. But demand still can vary based economic conditions: for example, a haircut can be made to weeks ratherthan three. In addition, sales of some products respond to cycles other tha Because durables are expensive and can be paid for over their long demand for them can go up and down (everything else being equal) fluctuations in the credit cycle make financing more and less readily available. And some thingsare influenced by non-cyclical developments:

example, the demand for new cell phones and laptops responds reductions, new product introductions and improvements in technology For the most part, however, economic growth dominates the process through whichsales are determined. Sales generally rise strongly when GDP growth is strong and less so (or they decline) when it isn’t. ∾ But the linkage between economic growth and profit growth is imperfect. This is because the movements of the economic cycle aren’ only thing that influences sales (as just shown), and also because a sales doesn’t necessarily result in an equivalent change in profits. main reasons for this latter phenomenon is the fact that most busin characterized by leverage of two types.Theseare elements that magn response of profits to a change in sales. The meaning of more immediately obvious from the British word for it: gearing. First, businesses are subject to operating leverage. Profits equal rev minuscosts (or expenses). Revenues are the result of sales, and we know sales fluctuate for a large number of reasons. So do costs, and of costs fluctuate in different ways, particularly in response to chan sales. Most businesses have some costs that are fixed, some that are semi-fixed, and some that are variable. For example, take a taxicab company: It has its headquarters in an officebuilding, but when ridersh a bit, it doesn’t need to add more officespace. This is fixed cost. It has a fleet of taxis. The current fleet can accommodate increase in ridership, but if trips increase enough, it may additional cabs. Thus the expense for cabs is semi-fixed. Its cabs are powered by gasoline. If an increase in busine cabs to go x% more miles,their consumption of gasoline is increase by that same x%. For the taxi company, then, the cost gasoline is variable. The sum of the abovemeans that if the company’s ridership (an revenues) increases by 20%, its spending on officefacilities won’tincre its spending on cabs probably won’tincrease initially, but may later; spending on gasoline will increase immediately and proportionately. taxicab company’s total costs will increase with an increase in rider usually less than its revenues. This will cause its profit margin to meaning the increase in operating profits will be considerably increase in sales: that’s operating leverage. In general, it’s higher

companies for whom a largerpercentage of costs are fixed and lowe ones whose costs are more variable. Operating leverage is great for companies when the economy does we sales rise. But when the opposite happens, it’s less good: profits can than sales, and if conditions are bad enough, profits can turn into Companies can, however, take actions to limit the effect on profits decline. Thesecan include laying off employees and closing store economy measures usually need time to take effect; (b) they some increased expense in the short run, as in the case of severance generally can limit the negative effect but not eliminate it; and (d) work as well as projected. The second form of leverage affecting most companies is financial leverage. Let’s say a given company’s operating profits decline by 33%),from $3,000 to $2,000. If the company’s $30,000 capital has been sourced entirely through equity, meaning it hasn’tborro its capital and doesn’t have to make any interest payments, that flow through to the company’s net income—the “bottom line”—and would fall by 33%. But most companies are financed with a combination of equity Debtholdersoccupy a seniorposition relative to the equity inves said to be in the “first-loss” position; this means the equity declines in profits, and then all losses, until the equity is time any further lossesfall to the debtholders.As long as there’s company, the outcome for the debtholders remains unchanged—they mere receive the interest payments they were promised. (That’s why bond notes are called“fixed income securities”: the outcome is fixed.) Let’s assume the capital structure of this company consists of debt (requiring annual interest payments of $1,500) and $15,000 That means the $1,000 decline in operating profits reduces from $1,500 ($3,000 of operating profit before interest payments, $1,500 of interest) to $500 ($2,000 minus$1,500). In other word decline in operating profit (from $3,000 to $2,000) causes this income to decline by 67% (from $1,500 to $500). The magn decline in operating profit on the net income illustrates financial work. ∾ The process that determines a company’s profits is complex and The economic cycle has a profound effect on some companies’ sales but on others. Largely because of differences in operating and finan a given percentage change in sales has a much greater impact some companies than for others.

And, of course, idiosyncratic developments can have a very sig impact on profits. Thesecan include thingslike management’s decis regarding inventories, production levels, and capital investment; technologic advancements (on the part of a company, its industry competitor companies in competing industries—see below); changes in regulation taxation; and even developments exogenous to the industry, or even business world, such as weather, war and fads. The economic cycle the backdrop for changes in companies’ sales and profits, but the deviation from the cycle-based expectation is vast. Idiosyncratic developments are the main reason. I’ll take a moment here to deal with the subject of technolo devote a separate chapter to it). “Disrupt” is the word of ability of new technologies to disrupt traditional industries can competitionand dismantle the incumbents’ profit margins. Take, for exam the newspaper industry. As recently as the 1990s: Newspaperswere considered an indispensable source of information. Most people bought a newspaper daily—or maybe one on work and another on the way home—and the cost was small. Even if you bought the newspaper on Monday, you still had another on Tuesday; there was no “shelflife” or protracted useful Newspaperswere one of the very few ways local businesses like movie theaters and used-car dealers could reach their customers, and a newspaper from one city generally couldn’t compete for local advertising from another. Competition came primarily from other newspapers,television and radio. Once a newspaper was strongly established in a city, howev would be hard to displace—thus newspapers were viewed as with strong “moats.” Because this combination of factors was seen as making ne position largely impregnable, newspaper company stocks were thoug “defensive,” benefiting from highly stablerevenues and profits. Who would have thought that the Internet and other formsof on communication would significantly impact the fortunes of news than twenty years? Today many companies compete to bring infor directly to consumers. Newspapersare struggling to maintain their mark share and profitability, as “free”has come to characterizemany aspects digital world, knocking newspapers’ business models off stride Newspapersprovide an excellent example of the ability of an factorto influence a company’s sales and profits, completely apart from economic and traditional profit cycle.But isn’t technology cyclical itself?

Technologies are born, they prosper, and then they are replaced by ones. The innovation of a few years ago can be supplanted more rapid ever these days, and the list of industries that are perceived as being to disruption seemsto shrink every day. Thirty or forty years ago, it seemed as if the worldwas a provided a relatively unchanging backdrop for life, and economic developments—including cycles—played out against that unchanging backdrop. Today, largely because of technological developments socialand cultural), nothing seemsunchanging.In fact, much appears to changing too fast for most of us to keep up with it.