VII THE PENDULUM OF INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY In business, financial and market cycles, most excesses on th —andthe inevitable reactions to the downside, whichalso tend to overshoot—are the result of exaggeratedswings of the pendulum o psychology.Thus understanding and being alert to excessive swings is an entry-level requirementfor avoiding harm from cyclical extremes, and hopefully for profiting from them. So far we have discussed the economic cycle,governments’ efforts influence the economic cycle,and the profit cycle.To a great extentthese thingsprovide the backdrop or environment for investing. And they to be exogenous to investing—independent processes that operate on own. But anyone who thinksthese thingsare “mechanical” in their opera and in full control of investment results underestimates the role or, I tend to say interchangeably, emotion. (Psychology and emot certainly different elements, but I see no meaningful way to distin between the two in terms of their effect on the investment environmen First, swings in emotion/psychology strongly influence the economi corporate profit cycles, as indicated. And second, they play a very part in causing ups and downs in the investment world—especiall short run. As I noted in chapter I, there is no fundamental distinctio and pendulum swings. In fact, I could have made life easierfor all titlingthis chapter “The Cyclein Psychology” and fittingthis phenomeno within a consistent nomenclature. But, for some unspecified reason, introduced the notion of the “pendulum”in emotion/psychology in second memo to clients, “First Quarter Performance” (April1991 I haven’t founda reason to distance myself from it in going to continue to refer to it here. To introduce the pendulum, I’m going to borrow from what I wr 1991:

The mood swings of the securities markets resemble the movem a pendulum. Although the midpoint of its arc best describes th location of the pendulum “on average,” it actually spends v its time there. Instead, it is almost always swinging toward from the extremes of its arc. But whenever the pendulum is n either extreme, it is inevitable that it will move back toward th midpoint sooner or later. In fact, it is the movement toward extreme itself that supplies the energy for the swingback. Investment markets make the same pendulum-like swing: between euphoria and depression, between celebrating positive developments and obsessing over negatives, and thus between being overpriced and underpriced. This oscillation is one of the most dependable features of the investment world, and investor psychology seemsto spendmuch more time at the extremes than it does at a “happy medium I returned to the topic in “It’s All Good” (July 2007). Be make a new observation,I listed a half-dozen additional elements in pendulum swings are seen: between greed and fear, between optimism and pessimism, between risk tolerance and risk aversion, between credence and skepticism, between faith in value in the futureand insistence of concrete value in the present, and between urgency to buy and panic to sell. I find particularly interesting the degree to whichthe polarities li aboveare interrelated.Whena market has been rising strongly for a while, we invariably see all nine of the elements listed first. A the market’s been declining, we see all of the elements listed s Rarely do we see a blend of the two sets, given that the c each are causally related, with one giving rise to the next. A lot of what I wrote then about the pendulum correspondsdirectly what I wrote about cycles back in chapter I. There’s a swin extreme or the other;then the attainment of an extreme that can’t exceeded; and then a swingback toward the midpoint, fueled by

of momentum.It mightbe said that the pendulum also tends to regre the mean or midpoint, but—like most cycles—it usually overshoots and continues toward the extreme opposite from whence it came. ∾ Why is the pendulum important? In essence, the too-strong upward downward swings of the cycles I’m covering in this book large —andrepresent—psychological excesses in action. The trendline rate of growth in economic output and corpor moderate, and when participants’ pro-cyclical decisions cause growth be abnormally rapid (otherthan in times of recovery from recession), this usually represents a too-optimistic expansion from whichthere be a retreat. Likewise, it seemsrational that, in the long run, stocks overal provide returns in line with the sum of their dividends plus growth in corporate profits, or something in the mid-to-high digits. Whenthey returnmuch more than that for a while, that likely to prove to have been excessive—borrowing from the futureand thus rendering stocks risky—meaning a downward correction is order. In business, financial and market cycles, most excesses on the the inevitable reactions to the downside, whichalso tend to overshoot— the result of exaggeratedswings of the pendulum of psychology.Thus understanding and being alert to excessive swings is an entry-level requirementfor avoiding harm from cyclical extremes, and hopefully for profiting from them. The norms in terms of growth and appreciation are in so and “healthy.” And if the participants built their behavior around those —instead of occasionally building up hopesfor more and thus settin stage for eventual moves toward less—the worldwould be a tempestuous, and less-error-prone place.But that’s not the nature of I touched on the inapplicability of norms in “The Happy July 2004, but now with data brought up to date through 2016): Putting it all together, fluctuations in attitudes and behavior c to make the stock market the ultimate pendulum. In my 47 f calendar years in the investment business, starting with 1970, the annual returns on the S&P 500 have swung from plus 37% to 37%. Averaging out good years and bad years,the long-run returnis

usually statedas 10% or so. Everyone’s been happywith that typical performance and would love more of the same. But remember, a swinging pendulum may be at its midpoint average,” but it actually spends very little time there. The same is of financial market performance. Here’s a fun question ( illustration): for how many of the 47 years from 1970 through 2 was the annual returnon the S&P 500 within 2% of “norma is, between 8% and 12%? I expected the answer to be “not that often,” but I learn that it had happened only three times!It also surprised me to learn that the returnhad been more than 20 percentage pointsaway from “normal”—either up more than 30% or down more than 10%— more than one-quarter of the time: 13 out of the last 47 years.S thing that can be said with total conviction about stock market performance is that the average certainly isn’t the norm.Market fluctuations of this magnitude aren’tnearly fully explained by the changing fortunes of companies, industries or economies. They’re largely attributable to the mood swings of investors. Lastly, the times when returnis at the extremes aren’trandomly distributed over the years.Rather they’re clustered, due to the f investors’ psychological swings tend to persist for a while— paraphrase Herb Stein, they tend to continue until they stop. Most of those 13 extreme up or down years were within a year or tw another year of similarly extreme performance in the same d How about an example of the pendulum in action? One of the most time-honored market adages says that “markets between greed and fear.” There’s a fundamental reason for this: people fluctuate between greed and fear. In other words, sometimes feel positive and expect good things, and when that’s the case, they greedy and fixate on making money. Their greed causes them to make investments, and their bidding causes markets to rise and appreciate. But at other times,they feel less good and their expectations turn ne In that case, fear takes over. Rather than enthuse about making mone worryabout losingit. This causes them to shrink from buying—eliminat the upward impetus beneath asset prices—andperhaps to sell, push down. Whenthey’re in “fear mode,” people’s emotions bring nega to bear on the markets. Here’s part of the discussion of the swingbetween greed and fea “The Happy Medium” (July 2004):

WhenI was a rookie analyst, we heard all the time that “ market is driven by greed and fear.” Whenthe market environ in healthy balance, a tug-of-war takes place between optimists in on making money and pessimists seeking to avoid losses. T want to buy stocks, even if they have to pay a price a b yesterday’s close, and the latter want to sell them, even if it’s on a downtick. Whenthe market doesn’t go anyplace, it’s because the senti behind this tug-of-war is evenly divided, and the people—or f —on the two ends of the rope carry roughly equal weight. The optimists may prevail for a while, but as securities are b become more highly priced, and then the pessimists gain sway a sell them down. . . . It didn’ttake long in my early days, however, for me to reali often the market is driven by greed or fear. At the times th count, large numbers of people leave one end of the rope f Eitherthe greedy or the fearful predominate, and they move th market dramatically. Whenthere’s only greed and no fear, for example, everyone wantsto buy, no one wantsto sell, and few p can think of reasons why pricesshouldn’t rise. And so they do—of in leaps and bounds and with no apparent governor. Clearly that’s what happened to tech stocks in 1999. Greedwas dominant characteristic of that market. Thosewho weren’t participating were forced to watcheveryone else get rich. “Pruden investors” were rewarded with a feeling of stupidity. The buyers moving that market felt no fear. “There’s a new paradigm,” w battle cry, “get on board before you miss the boat. And by the w the price I’m buying at can’t be excessive, because the market always efficient.” Everyone perceived a virtuous cycle in favor o tech stocks to whichthere could be no end. But eventually something changes. Eithera stumbling block materializes, or a prominent company reports a problem, o exogenous factorintrudes. Pricescan also fall under their own weight or based on a downturn in psychology with no obvious cause. Certainly no one I know can say exactly what it was that b tech-stock bubble in 2000. But somehow the greed evaporated and fear took over. “Buy before you miss out” was replaced by “Sell before it goes to zero.” And thus fear comes into the ascendancy.People don’t worryabou missing opportunities; they worryabout losingmoney. Irrational exuberance is replaced by excessive caution. Whereas in 1999 p the-sky forecasts for a decade out were embraced warmly, in

investors chastened by the corporate scandals said, “I’ll never trust management again” and “Howcan I be sure any financial s are accurate?” Thus almost no one wanted to buy the bondso scandal-plagued companies, for example, and they sunk to giveaway prices. It’s from the extremes of the cycle of fear and greed th the greatest investment profits, as distressed debt demonstrated in 2003. “Greed/fear” is the most obvious psychological or emotional co along whichinvestors swing, and in many ways the most illustrative. Wha are some of the other key emotional or psychological swings? Most a manner similar to the greed/fear pendulum, and usually this coincidence. The various parameters are interrelated.Here are a few examples. Underlying the swingbetween greed and fear is the swingbetween euphoria and depression. As previously described, for example, it may simply that positive events give rise to greed. Rather, posit encourage euphoria, whichabets greed (and vice versa for negative events, depression and fear). Euphoria and depression are the foundation emotions that give rise to the swings that follow. Euphoric investors may be excited about current developments an that may arise in the future, and this may accentuate their fixation expectation of—profit. On the other hand, depressed investors are unlikely feel positive enough to be greedy. If you think about it, euph inconsistentwith fear, and depression is inconsistentwith greed. In a similar vein, investors also swingbetween optimism and pe Positive events generally give rise to expectations of further and positive outcomes . . . a state better known as optim underlie greed; it makes no sense to think people can be forward to investwhen their expectations are negative. Clearly, optim pessimism encourage other emotions and influence behavior. ∾ The next phenomenon I want to touch on is the tendency of between credulousness and skepticism, and to fluctuate between being entranced by the possibility of profit in the futureand insistent on value in the here and now. Sometimes—usually when thingsare going well in the worldand asset pricesare rising—investors become willing to swallow favorable storie regarding futuredevelopments, buy into appreciated assets, and shoulder elevated risk. But when thingstake a turn for the worse, they beco likely to reject even reasonable projections and decline to buy, largely

because pricesare down (even though that increases the likelihood that are cheap). Some investors spendtheir time working hard to quantify this year’s earnings and the growth thereafter. Others strive to value real a intellectual property and business advantages (and predict what others will pay for them). Still otherstry to deduce the value implica mergers and acquisitions, balance sheet restructurings and private public transactions. In all of these ways and many more, it’s th those in the investment business to predict the futureand put a on it. Let me give you an example. In 2000–01, our distressed debt invested a few hundred million dollars in bankrupt telecom companies. In each case, the purchase price implied a value for th company that was a small fraction of the amounts that had b invested in hard assetssuch as switching gear or fiber-optic cable.I we could resell the equipment for a higher percentage of its c we had paid, the investment would be profitable. The first sale went well, and we made a quick 50%. But soon thereafter, people stopped showing up to bid on these assets. the party to whom we had sold the first company thought h bargain, in later instances the possible buyers shied away from a that were turning out to be in heavyoversupply. And that brings my point. In 1999, investors accepted at face value their telecom companies’ rosy predictions of the future, and they were willing to pay handily for that potential. But in 2001, they saw the potenti largely empty and wouldn’t pay a dime for it, given that th capacity vastlyexceeded its current needs and no one could imagin the excess being absorbed in their lifetime. This cycle in investo willingness to value the futureis one of the most powerful cycles exists. A simple metaphor relating to real estate helped me to this phenomenon: What’s an empty building worth? An e building (a) has a replacementvalue,of course, but it (b) th no revenues and (c) costs money to own, in the form of ta insurance, minimum maintenance, interest payments and opportunity costs. In other words, it’s a cash drain. Wheninvestors are in a pessimistic mood and can’t see more than a few years out, they can only think about the negative cash flows and are unable to imagin time when the building will be rented and profitable. But when th mood turns upward and interest in futurepotential runs high, investo

envision it full of tenants, throwing off vast amounts of c salable at a fancy price. Fluctuation in investors’ willingness to ascribe value to possible futuredevelopments represents a variation on the full-or-empty c Its swings are enormously powerful and mustn’t be underestimate (“TheHappy Medium,” July 2004) ∾ The superior investor is mature, rational, analytical, objective and unemotional. Thus he performs a thorough analysis of investment fundamentals and the investment environment. He calculates the intrin value of each potential investment asset. And he buys when any discount the price from the current intrinsic value,plus any potential increases intrinsic value in the future, together suggest that buying at a good idea. In order to be able to do all the above, the superior inv appropriate balance between fear (which is shorthand for risk avers for loss, and respect for uncertainty and randomness) and greed (a.k.a aspiration, aggressiveness and acquisitiveness). All people feel emotions, the superior investor keeps these conflicting elements in balance. The presence of the two offsetting forcesleads to responsible,wise and even keeled behavior. But the important pointsare these: Few people are always even-keeledand unemotional. For this reason, few investors are capable of staking out position that balances greed and fear—and staying there—as moreless-positive developments arise. To the contrary, most investors swingbetween being greedy when they’re optimistic and fearful when they’re pessimistic. Most swingto those positions at the wrong time—becoming greedi after the emergence of positive developments has caused prices become elevated, and becoming more fearful after negative events caused pricesto become depressed. Here’s some of what I wrote about the swingof psychology in “O Couch” (January 2016): Thereare many more ways in whichnon-objective, non-rational quirks commonly affect behavior. As Carol Tavris pointed out in May 15, 2015 Wall StreetJournal review of Prof. Richard Thaler’ book Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics (2015):

As a socialpsychologist, I have long been amused by economists and their curiously delusional notion of the “rational man.”Rational? Where do these folks live? Even 50 years ago, experimental studies were demonstrating that people stay with clearly wrong decisions ratherthan change them, throwgood money after bad, justify failed predictions ratherthan admit they were wrong, and resist,distort or actively reject information that disputes their beliefs. The difficulty of understanding events, their significanceand their potential ramifications comes in good part from the kinks in in psyches, and it contributes to—and feeds back to exacerbate— investors’ responses. Thus investors tend to emphasize just the positives or the negatives much more often than they take a balance objective approach. And they tend to become optimistic and eager to buy when good news, positively interpreted, has forced pricesup . . and vice versa.All of this is obvious (especially in retrospect). T equally obviously, understanding and dealing with it presents a potential way to improve results. The basic point is that psychology does swing, and most people’s be swings with it. The fluctuation between greed and fear is typical of the psychological pendulum. In fact, it explains not only the most investors, but also—taking investors collectively—the behavior of markets. Markets move upward when events are positive and psych turns up, and they fall when events are negative and psychology turns The pendulum spends only a little of the time at the midpoint Rather, the pendulum is usually swinging toward one extreme first recovering from one psychological extreme—either too high or too —andthen continuing toward the other. The superior investor resists psychological excesses and thus ref participate in these swings. The vast majority of the highly super I know are unemotional by nature. In fact, I believe their is one of the great contributorsto their success. This is one of my most persistent observations and—in a rel of the questions I’m most often asked is whether people can learn unemotional. My answer is “yes and no.” I think it’s possible on the lookout for potential emotional influences and to try to effect. But I also think people who are inherently unemotional much easier. A lack of emotionality is a gift (in investing, not in other areas, like marriage). It’s not my point that emotional peop

can’t be good investors, but it will require a great deal of self-a self-restraint. ∾ In addition to the interrelatedness of the various emotional swin on the last few pages, it’s also important to note the causal phenomena.Just as positive events give rise to euphoria, and euph rise to optimism, and optimism abets an increase in greed, swin of all these elements cause the way investors perceive thingsto fluctu between rosy and dark. Investors’ perception of events is colored swings along the various emotional or psychological arcs. And this perception feeds back, creating more euphoria, optimism and greed. Here’s how I put it in “On the Couch” (January 2016): One of the most significant factors keeping investors from reachin appropriate conclusions is their tendency to assessthe worldwith emotionalism ratherthan objectivity. Their failings take two primary forms: selective perception and skewed interpretation. In other w sometimes they take note of only positive events and ignore th negative ones, and sometimes the opposite is true. And sometimes they view events in a positive light, and sometimes it’s negativ rarelyare their perceptions and interpretations balanced and neutral. Ever since the events of August 2015 in China, I’ve repea foundmyself harking back to one of the oldestcartoons in m and still one of the very best:

“Everything that was good for the market yesterday is no good f © BERNARD SCHOENBAUM The bottom line is that investor psychology rarelygives equal weight to both favorable and unfavorabledevelopments. Likewise, investors’ interpretation of events is usually biased by their emotion whatever is going on at the moment. Most developments have b helpful and harmful aspects. But investors generally obsess a or the other ratherthan consider both. And that recalls another c cartoon:

“On Wall Street today, news of lower interest rates sent the stock market up, but that these rates would be inflationary sent the market down, until the realization stimulate the sluggish economy pushed the market up, before it ultimately overheated economy would lead to a reimposition of higher interest rates.” B © BOB MANKOFF; WWW.BOBMANKOFF.COM It all seemsso obvious: investors rarelymaintain objective, rational, neutral and stablepositions. First they exhibit high levelso optimism, greed, risk tolerance and credulousness, and their resultin behavior causes asset pricesto rise, potential returns to fall, a to increase. But then, for some reason—perhaps the arrival of a tipping point—theyswitch to pessimism, fear, risk aversion and skepticism, and this causes asset pricesto fall, prospective returns to rise, and risk to decrease. Notably, each groupof phenomena tends to happen in unison, and the swingfrom one to the other often g beyond what reason mightcall for. That’s one of the crazy things: in the real world, thing fluctuate between “pretty good”and “not so hot.” But in the w investing, perception often swings from “flawless” to “hopeless.” The pendulum careens from one extreme to the other, spending almost time at “the happymedium” and ratherlittle in the range of reasonableness. First there’s denial, and then there’s capitulation.

The worldis full of positive and negative events, and on mo some of each. And some of the events that occur are ambiguous, havin elements of both good and bad, making them subject to either posit negative interpretation. Take the example of the second cartoon. Low interest rates are because they stimulate business activity and increase the discounted value of futurecash flows. But they’re also bad, since the stronger activity they abet can give rise to inflation and thus signalthe centr that rates should be raised, withdrawing stimulus from the econ Interpretation may not fluctuate between the extremes several times the cartoon suggests. But it does fluctuate excessively,and in fact on a dime. A few years ago my friendJon Brooks supplied this great illustrati skewed interpretation at work. Here’s how investors react to even they’re feeling good about life (which usually means the mark rising): Strong data: economy strengthening—stocks rally Weakdata: Fed likely to ease—stocks rally Data as expected: low volatility—stocks rally Banks make $4 billion: business conditions favorable—stocksrally Banks lose $4 billion: bad news out of the way—stocks Oil spikes: growing global economy contributingto demand—st rally Oil drops: more purchasing power for the consumer—stocks Dollar plunges: great for exporters—stocks rally Dollar strengthens:great for companies that buy from abroad—stocks rally Inflation spikes: will cause assetsto appreciate—stocks rally Inflation drops: improves quality of earnings—stocks rally Of course, the same behavior also applies in the opposite dir psychology is negative and markets have been falling for a while is capable of being interpreted negatively. Strong economic data is likely to make the Fed withdraw stimulus by raising interest rates data is taken to mean companies will have trouble meeting earnings In other words, it’s not the data or events; it’s the interpretati fluctuates with swings in psychology. At the greatest extremes of the pendulum’s swing, a process

appearance of a virtuous circle or a vicious circle. Wheneven predominantly positive and psychology is rosy, negative developments to be overlooked, everything is interpreted favorably, and thingsare often thought to be incapable of taking a turn for the worse. expectation of further advances appears irresistible; past constraints and norms are ignored or rationalized away;and anyone imagining limit the positive futureis dismissed as an old fogey lacking imagination potential for gains comes to be viewed as infinite. Asset price encouraging further optimism. But on the other hand, when thingshave been going badly for months or years and psychology is highly negative, it’s the potential for impr that can be forgotten. Unpleasant events are emphasized and positive ignored. The case for further deterioration seemsrock-solid, its error imagined, and now it’s the downside that seemsto be unlimited. Price resulting in further pessimism. The virtuous circle and the vicious circle are both unrealistic exaggera Whilethey’ve been dreamed up many times in the past, they’ve neve out. But that fact doesn’t enable most people to resist them while rampant. Again, the superior investor—who resists external influences, rem emotionallybalanced and acts rationally—perceives both positive and negative events, weighs events objectively and analyzes them dispa But the truth is that sometimes euphoria and optimism cause most inves view thingsmore positively than is warranted, and sometimes depression and pessimism make them see only bad and interpret events with a nega Refusing to do so is one of the keys to successful investing. ∾ For a bullish phase to hold sway, the environment has to b characterized by greed, optimism, exuberance,confidence, credulity, daring, risk tolerance and aggressiveness. But these traits will not govern a market forever. Eventually they will give way to f pessimism, prudence, uncertainty, skepticism, caution, risk aversion and reticence. . . . Busts are the product of booms, a it’s usually more correct to attribute a bust to the excesse preceding boom than to the specific event that sets off the correcti (“Now What?,” January 2008) Usually, when either set of polar extremes is in the ascendancy fact is readily observable, and thus the implications for investo should be obvious to objective observers. But of course, th the market pendulum to one extreme or the other occurs f

reason that the psyches of most market participants are moving same direction in a herd-like fash-ion. Few of the people involved actually are objective. To conti thread from my memo “Everyone Knows” (April2007), expecti widespread clinical observation during a market maniamakes a as much sense as saying “everyone knows the market has g far.” If many people recognized that it had gone too far, it w there. (“It’s All Good,” July 2007)