VIII THE CYCLE IN ATTITUDES TOWARD RISK The rational investor is diligent, skeptical and appropriately r averse at all times,but also on the lookout for opportunities potential returnthat more than compensates for risk. That’s the id But in good times,we hear most people say, “Risk? What risk? I don’t see much that could go wrong: look how well thingshave been going. And anyway, risk is my friend—the more risk I take, th money I’m likely to make.” Then, in bad times,they switch to something simpler: “I don’ if I ever make another pennyin the market; I just don’t w any more. Get me out!” Now that we’vemoved on from considering cycles in the abstra discussing their operation in the investment world, I’m going to provi brief aside regarding the fundamental nature of investing, in order a foundation for the discussion that will follow. Some of this admi be familiar from earlier chapters. What is investing? One way to think of it is as bearing ris profit. Investors try to position portfolios so as to profit from developments ratherthan be penalized by them. The superior investor simply someone who does this better than others. Do we know what will happen in the future? Some investors thi —or think they have to act as if they do, because if they don’t their jobs and their clients—or they have been pursuing profit through forecasts for so long that they’ve brainwashed themselves into belie possible to be right about the future(and have become conditioned to their low past success rates). Other investors—the smarter, more self-a ones, I think—understand that the futureisn’t knowable with certainty. may form opinions regarding futureevents, but they don’t bet heavily those opinions will prove correct. Since (a) investing consists of dealing with the futurebut (b) the isn’t knowable, that’s wherethe risk in investing comes from. If futur

were predictable, investing would be easy and profit would be sure. general level of returns mightbe low in that case because so involved; that’s a topic for another day.) But the fact that events predictable introduces risk. Because the events that actually occur may different than those that were predicted, or the market’s reaction to may differ from what was expected, a portfolio may be positioned incor for the futurethat unfolds. Since risk (that is, uncertainty with regard to futuredevelopments, an possibility of bad outcomes) is the primary source of the chall investing, the ability to understand, assessand deal with risk is the the superior investor and an essential—I’m tempted to say the requirementfor investment success. Finally as to foundation, it’s important to recognize that while the investment environment variesover time, at any particular point in time given. What I mean is that we can accept the environment or we can reject it and stay on the sidelines, but we don’t have of saying, “I don’t like the environment as it is today; one.” Or ratherwe can demand another, but of course that won’ materialize. My view that risk is the main moving piece in investing makes conclude that at any given point in time, the way investors collectively viewing risk and behaving with regard to it is of overwhelm shaping the investment environment in whichwe find ourselves. And of the environment is key in determininghow we should behav to risk at that point. Assessing whereattitudes toward risk stand in is what this chapter is about—perhaps the most important one in ∾ One of the luckiest breaks I received in my lifetime came opportunity to attendthe University of Chicago’s Graduate School of Business (sincerenamed the BoothSchool) in 1967–69. I, like many in those days, went straight from college to graduate school, perha most efficient route to success, but with the addedincentive provided Vietnam War and accompanying draft. Over the four prior years,I had received a nuts-and-bolts educatio finance at Wharton: practical, non-theoretical and qualitative. My choic graduate school was most fortuitous, as Chicago had just begunto new theory of finance and investment that had been developed, large in the early 1960s. Thus my Wharton training was paired with— juxtaposed against—further study in finance that was almost entirely academic, theoretical and quantitative.

Soon after arriving at Chicago, I was exposed to a graphic much of the foundation for the new theory of investment, and that as the starting point for much of my thinking and writing ever This graphic has become ubiquitous in the investment worldin the since my first exposure to it fifty years ago. Its essence lies in line slopes up and to the right, indicating a positive relationship and return. This is usually misinterpreted, in my view, as mean assetsproduce higher returns,” and thus “if you want to make more the answer is to take more risk.” This formulation cannot be corre riskier assetscould be counted on to produce higher returns, definition wouldn’t be riskier. The linearity with whichthe relationship between risk and returnis presented in the graphic aboveignores the fact that at every level is a range of potential outcomes regarding return, and thus it reliability of the relationship. That’s what makes people say investmentsproduce higher returns. Instead, I think the graphic interpreted as saying, “Investments that seem riskier have to appe promise higher returns, or else no one will make them.” Word and “appear” are the right ones, since they indicate that risk and poten returncan only be estimated, and that the investment worlddoesn’t work a machine. That makes those wordshighly appropriate—actually, comp

—for use when discussing investing. (For a more thorough discussion, see chapter 5 of The Most Important Thing.) People who immediately “get” concepts like risk and risk/return us have an intuitive sense that prepares them to be good investors. I reasons behind my interpretation of the graphic will become clear once I have prompted you to think about it. Let’s suppose a logical investor is offered two investmentswi expected return, but in one case the returnis virtually assured it is highly uncertain. We would expect him to choose people prefercertainty over uncertainty. If a Treasury bond and a startup both seemed likely to return7%, for example, the vast majo people would go with the Treasury. Why take the extra risk assoc the startup if no potential increase in returnis offered to incremental risk? Well, that’s the point:most people would prefera sure 7% over a 7%. In other words, most people are risk-averse. That’s the essen assumption that underlies the “Chicago school” of finance. To describe risk aversion, I say most people prefersafetyand dis —even though I’ve never seen the word “disprefer” in a dictionary. big difference of opinion regarding the propriety of that word, with linguistic establishment railing against it, but I think it’s a doesn’t exist, it should.) The widespread dislike for risk and the resultant insistence on inc potential returnif incremental risk is to be borne are the reasons term Treasurys carry higher yieldsthan short-term Treasurys; why high yield bondspromise higher returns than investment grade bonds; why stock generally expected to returnmore than bonds; and why venture capit investing is expected to provide higher returns than public I’m only talking here about “expectations” and “promises”—or what “may happen” or “should happen”—rather than thingsthat “will happen” or sure to happen.” But that expectation of incremental returngenerally has present in order for most people to voluntarily take on addedrisk. Because of the natural dispreference for risk, it’s entirely rea expect that if they’re going to bear it, investors have to be possibility of an incremental reward. Non-daredevils will do risky thing if they expect a generous reward for doing so. Nothing else Risk aversion is an essential element in investing. People’s av causes them to policethe markets. Because most people are avers they approach investing with caution, they perform careful analysis when considering investments, and especially risky ones,

they incorporate conservative assumptions and appropriate skepticism into their analysis, they demand greater margins of safetyon risky investmentsto against analytical errorsand unpleasant surprises, they insist on healthy risk premiums—the expectation of incremental returns—if they’re going to undertake risky investments, and they refuseto investin deals that make no sense. Theseare all essential parts of the investment process. Because ris investors perform them, investing is a rational field in whichreaso propositions are offered. In short, risk aversion is the main elem markets safe and sane. Please note, however, that the aboveis a normative description, or description of how thingsshould be. Theseare thingsthe superior inves does, and that all investors should do. But the bottom line is does them, and certainly not all investors do them equally at all It’s one of the absolute truths that attitudes toward risk change, doing they alter the investment environment. That’s what the rest of chapter will be about. ∾ Here’s another aside:How is the investment environment formed? is the result of discussions that take place in the marketplace—either each investor’s consciousness or among investors, spoken or signa their actions. Here’s how I described the creation of the inves environment in “Risk and Return Today” in October 2004: I’ll use a “typical” market of a few years back to illustrat worksin real life: The interest rate on the 30-day T-bill mighth been 4%. So an investor says, “If I’m going to go out five y want 5%. And to buy the 10-year note I have to get 6%.” H a higher rate to extend maturity because he’s concerned a to purchasing power, a risk that is assumed to increase w maturity. That’s why the yield curve, whichin reality is a the capital market line, normally slopes upward with the in asset life. Now let’s factorin credit risk. “If the 10-year Treasury pays 6%, I’m not going to buy a 10-year single-A corporate unless I promised 7%.” This introduces the concept of credit spreads. Our hypothetical investor wants100 basis pointsto go from a “guvvie a “corporate.”If the consensus of investors feels the same, that’s w the spread will be.

What if we depart from investment grade bonds? “I’m not goin touch a high yield bond unless I get 600 over a Treasury n comparable maturity.” So high yield bondsare required to yield 12%, for a spread of 6% over the Treasury note, if they’re g buyers. Now let’s leave fixed income altogether. Things get tougher, because you can’t look anywhere to find the prospective returnon investmentslike stocks (that’s because, simply put, their returns conjectural, not “fixed”). But investors have a sense for these things. “Historically S&P stocks have returned 10%, and I’ll only buy th I think they’re going to keep doing so.” So in theory, the c stock investor determines earnings per share,earnings growth rate a dividend payout ratio and inputsthem into a valuation model to at the price from whichS&P stocks will return10% (although I’m n sure the process is nearly that methodical in actuality). “And r stocks should returnmore;I won’tbuy on the NASDAQ unless think I’m going to get 13%.” From there it’s onward and upward. “If I can get 10% from I need 15% to accept the illiquidity and uncertainty associated w real estate. And 25% if I’m going to investin buyouts . . induce me to go for venture capital, with its low success That’s the way it’s supposed to work, and in fact I think does (although the requirements aren’tthe same at all times). T result is a capital market line of the sort that has become many of us, as shown below.

The process described aboveresults in the formation of the ris continuum or “capital market line.” The process establishes the gene of returnrelative to risk, as well as the quantum of incrementa return—or the “risk premium”—that will be expected for the bearing incremental risk. In a rational world, the result will be as follo Investmentsthat seem riskier will be priced so that they appea higher returns. The increase in returnper unit of incremental risk will be reason appropriate. The increase in expected returngenerally will appear to be proportional to the incremental risk (that is, bearing a unit risk at one point on the continuum will appear likely to bring amount of incremental returnas bearing a similar unit of elsewhere on the continuum). Thus there won’tbe particular pointson the continuum whereriskbearing is rewarded much more or much less than at others(that investmentswhose promised risk-adjusted returnis obviously superi the rest). In a rational world, any violations of these provisions would to move such that the pricesof mispriced assetsare bid up or push As a result: the violations would be corrected, all investmentswould offer risk-adjusted returns that are fair each other, and investors could increase their returns only by increasing the amoun risk they bear. If investors always behaved that way, their actions would ca to be marked by “efficient markets” whereno investment offersa adjusted returnthan any other. Of course markets don’t always opera they’re supposed to—things certainly aren’talways priced right—but general suggestion of efficiency is too logical to be disregarded efficiency is another essential topic, but I won’tgo into it furth 2 of The Most Important Thing, as well as the latter half of from January 2014.) ∾ The key thing to note is that fluctuations in attitudes toward risk exceptions to the principles described here. Sometimes investors become

risk-averse, and sometimes they relax their risk aversion and become too tolerant. Whenpositive events occur as described in the last chapter an optimism and greed rise, investors tend to become less risk-averse than and less risk-averse than they should be. What are the effects (follo from the list of the functions investors perform on page 106–107)? Since they feel better about the environment and are more optimistic about likely outcomes, they reduce the amount of caution they the investing process. Since they no longer consider investing to be risky, they don’t need for painstaking analysis. They tend to make assumptions that are more generous, and they skepticism with credulousness. They’re willing to make do with a reduced margin of Viewing risk as less worrisome, they no longer demand risk cushyas in the past. They behave less as sticklers, since they’re more attracted to on risky investmentsand less leery of the risk they involve. It is for these reasons that, as you’llsee in the next chapter, financings are completed in the most buoyant economies and financial markets. Good times cause people to become more optimistic, jettison caution, and settle for skimpy risk premiums on risky investments. since they are less pessimistic and less alarmed, they tend to lose intere the safer end of the risk/return continuum. This combination of elem makes the pricesof risky assetsrise relative to safer assets. Thus come as a surprise that more unwise investmentsare made in good in bad. This happens even though the higher priceson risky inves mean the prospective risk premiums offered for making those riskier investmentsare skimpier than they were in more risk-conscious times. The reduced insistence on adequate risk premiums causes the slo capital market line to flatten. Going back to high school that the slope of a line on a graph is the distance traveled per unit change along the horizontal axis. The slope of the capital reflects the amount of incremental potential returnthat is offered incremental risk borne. Thus it is a direct indication of the degre aversion present in the market. In times of obliviousness toward risk—or high risk tolerance—the demand in terms of risk premiums causes the slope of the line the amount of risk compensation to shrink.

The lower slope of the capital market line means, by definitio there’s less of a returnincrement per unit increase in risk. In the payoff for risk-bearingis sub-par. In my opinion, all of the abovefollows logically from direct ob The process is as follows: positive events lead to increased optimism, increased optimism makes people more risk-tolerant, an increase in risk tolerance causes lower risk premiums to demanded, a reduction in demanded risk premiums equates to lower deman returns on risky assets, a reduction of demanded returns on risky assetscauses their rise, and higher pricesmake assetseven riskier (but also attract buying of “momentum investors” who chase rising stocks). It follows from the abovethat risk is high when investors feel ris And risk compensation is at a minimum just when risk is at (meaning risk compensation is most needed). So much for the ration investor!

For me, the bottom line of all of this is that the greatest investment risk is the belief that there is no risk. Widespreadrisk tolera or a high degree of investor comfort with risk—is the great subsequent market declines. But because most investors are following progression described just above, this is rarelyperceived at the time perceiving it—and turning cautious—is most important. ∾ Since the other side of the coin should be obvious, I won’tbelab will take a minute to talk about what happens when the downward the cycle in attitudes toward risk makes investors more risk-averse One of the most important characteristics of psychological cycles extremeness. Cycles swingnot only in directions and degrees that sense,but also in wacky ways and to excess. For example, inves from time to time and say, “Let’s disregard risk. We’ll all get rich.” ardor and excitement cause them to bid pricesto levelsthat are so high— to accept tales that clearly are so unrealistic—that after the fact laughable if the damage done weren’t so great. And after they have committed these sins of excess—and lost a lot money in the resultant downswing toward greater prudence—they themselves for their excesses of greed and credulousness. They wonder they could have behaved so foolishly. They confess that they never really understood the exoticand exciting investment activities in whichthey had engaged. And they vow never to do it again. Just as the inadequacy of their risk aversion allowed them to pu and buy at the top—egged on by the visionof easy money in they couldn’t discern any risk—now they push pricesdown and sell at bottom. Their unpleasant recentexperience convinces them—contrary to what they had thought when everything was going well—that investing is a field in whichthey shouldn’t engage. And, as a consequence, their aversion goes all the way from inadequate to excessive. Giventheir recentpainful experience and the negativity they’ve developed about what lies ahead, they amp up their caution. Since they now associate investing with loss ratherthan profit, their process comes to emphasize the avoidance of further loss prospecting for opportunity. They ensure that their assumptions are conservative enough all potential for disappointment, and they apply extreme skepticism. They find it impossible to identify—even to imagine—investments offer an adequate margin of safety.

Since they see risk everywhere,they consider even the current swolle risk premiums insufficient. They become worrywarts.Just as risk tolerance had positioned them become buyers of overpriced assetsat the highs,now their scream risk aversion makes them sellers—certainly not buyers—at the bottom That’s the point. Under these circumstances, the perception of ris exaggeratedand the slope of the capital market line becomes exces In precisely the reverse of my description of the flat capital higher slope of this one means the expected returnincrement per in risk is unusually generous. This is a risk-averse market, and exaggeratedpayoff for risk-bearing. Thus the reward for bearing risk is greatest at just the moment when—no, rather, just becau absolutely refuseto bear it. As risk attitudes swingfrom high to low, so do opportunities for loss. Wheneverything’s going well and asset pricesare soaring, investors tend to view the futureas rosy, risk as their friend, and profit as achieved. Everyone feels the same, meaning little risk aversion is incorporated in prices, and thus they’re precarious. Investors beco tolerant just when they should increase their risk aversion.

And when events are down, so are investors. They think of the place to lose money, risk as something to be avoided at all depressingly likely. As I described at the end of the last excess of caution that prevails, (a) no one will accept possi incorporate any optimism at all and (b) they likewise cannot coun possibility that an assumption could be “too bad to be true.” Just as risk tolerance is unlimited at the top, it is non-exis This negativity causes pricesto fall to levelsfrom whichlossesare highl unlikely and gains could be enormous. But the sting of the prior decli tends to increase risk aversion and send investors to the sidelines (and thus risk) are at their lowest. ∾ I’d like to provide a real-life example of changing attitudes, of some quantification, taken from “The Happy Medium” (July 2004): The prevalence of risk-tolerance (or risk-obliviousness) in the la 1990swas clear. I personally heard a prominent brokerage house strategist say, “Stocks are overpriced, but not enough to keep th from being a buy.” And we all heard the man on the street say, “ up so much in my 401(k), it wouldn’t bother me if it (Where was that guy two or three years later?) No, those risk-tolerantattitudes will not persist forever. Eventually something will intrude, exposing securities’ imperfections and toohigh prices. Priceswill decline. Investors will like them less at $ than they did at $100. Fear of losingthe remaining $60 will overtak the urge to make back the lost $40. Risk aversion eventually will reassert itself (and usually go to excess). How about some quantification of this cycle? In mid-1998, just before the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management brough investors other than techies to their senses, only $12.5 billion o defaulted bondsyielded more than 20% (one possible threshold for the label “distressed debt”). Because investors weren’t very worried about risk, they demanded ultra-high returns from relatively few nondefaulted bonds; the word “blithe” mightbest describe their attitude But Long-Term’s demise awakened investors to the existence risk, and a year later, the amount of bondsyielding more than 2 had more than tripled to $38.7 billion. By mid-2002, when the corporate scandals held the debt market in a grip of terror, yielders had grown to $105.6 billion, eight and a half ti just four years earlier. Risk aversion had come a long way from inadequate and, as later events showed, had become excessive. B

March 31, 2004, this figurehad fallen 85%, back to just $16.2 billion; risk aversion had subsided (and possibly had become inadequate again). I’m sure that fundamentals didn’tfluctuate anywhere near th degree reflected in prices, yieldsand thus the distressed debt ta usual,reality was greatly exaggeratedby swings in psychology. Wheninvestors in general are too risk-tolerant, security price embody more risk than they do return. Wheninvestors are too r averse, pricescan offer more returnthan risk. The title of the memo cited above—“The Happy Medium”—wa by my mother’s wisdom and her constant reminders that we shou extremes in behavior. Rather we should tend toward the midd things—toward a reasonable balance between too much and too little But my experience as an investor convinces me that the happyme rarelyseen. If you reflect on what I said about the graph of a back on page 25, you may be impressed to find that in stages“a,” “g,” cyclical phenomena tend to returnfrom extremes and move toward more reasonable mean.What a rational thing that is! But then, as I pointed out, it’s usually the case that those “c extremes” continue past the fair midpoint in stages“b,” “e” and “h,” the opposite extreme. A statistician who looks at the abovegraphic will tell you that on the phenomenon charted is at the central value or astride But the rest of us see it as almost always in motion: back toward those midpoints. In fact, it spends about as much time

highs and lows as it does at the happymedium. Most investors’ attitu toward risk do the very same. What’s the greatest source of investment risk? Does it come fro economic developments? Corporate events that fall short of forecasts? Companies whose products become uncompetitive? Earnings declines? creditworthiness? No, it comes when asset pricesattain excessively high levelsas a result of some new, intoxicatinginvestment rationale that can’t justified on the basis of fundamentals, and that causes unreasonab valuations to be assigned. And when are these pricesreached? Whenrisk aversion and caution evaporate and risk tolerance and optimism take This condition is the investor’s greatest enemy. What Happens When RiskAversion Is Insufficien The Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08 represented the greatest finan downswing of my lifetime, and consequently it presents the best to observe, reflect and learn. The scene was set for its occurrence of developments. Here’s a partial list: Government policies supported an expansion of home ownership— whichby definition meantthe inclusion of people who historically couldn’t affordto buy homes—at a time when home priceswere soarin The Fed pushed interest rates down, causing the demand yielding instruments such as structured/levered mortgage securities to increase; Therewas a rising trend among banksto make mortgage loans,packa them and sell them onward (as opposed to retaining them); Decisions to lend, structure, assign credit ratings and investwere on the basis of unquestioning extrapolation of low historic default rates; The abovefour pointsresulted in an increased eagerness to extend mortgage loans,with an accompanying decline in lending standa Noveland untested mortgage backed securities were developed that promised high returns with low risk, something that has great appea non-skeptical times; Protective laws and regulations were relaxed, such as the Glass-Steaga Act (which prohibited the creation of financial conglomerates), uptick rule (which prevented traders who had bet against forcing them down through non-stop short selling), and the rules limited banks’ leverage, permitting it to nearly triple;

Finally, the mediaran articles stating that risk had been elimin combination of: the adroitFed, whichcould be counted on to inject stimulus whenever economic sluggishness developed, confidence that the excess liquidity flowing to Chinafor it and to oil producers would never fail to be recycled b markets, buoying asset prices, and the new Wall Streetinnovations,which“sliced and diced” risk s finely, spread it so widely and placed it with th bear it. The existence of all the aboveelements indicated the presence of tolerance. In fact, they couldn’t have arisenif risk tolerance hadn’t the psyches of investors, lenders, borrowers and regulators. The exist risk tolerance like that seen in the years immediately preceding the should be very worrisome, as it implies an absence of worr skepticism. It is inescapable that these developments—and the risk tolerance or obliviousness that was behind them—ultimately would lead to unsaf financial behavior, particularly via the issuance of financial instruments were unsound and likely to fail. The ability to borrow large amou at low interest rates caused asset buyers to consider the perio But it wasn’t marked by the availability of sound, bargain-pri Rather, the ready availability of leverage made it easy to investheav assetswhose priceshad risen a great deal, and in innovative, untested, synthetic, levered investment products, many of whichwould go on Perhaps most importantly among the contributingfactors, the period marked by risky behavior on the part of financial institutions. Whe is characterized by benign macro events, hyper-financial activ innovation, there is a tendency for providers of capital to comp share in a process I call “the race to the bottom” (I’ll make to a memo of that name). The mood in the years 2005–07 Citigroup CEO Charles Prince in June 2007, virtually on the eve Financial Crisis, in a statement that became emblematic of the musicstops, in terms of liquidity, thingswill be complicated. But as the music’s playing, you’ve got to get up and dance. We’r In other words, bankshad to do—and were doing—things that de for their success on the continuation of abnormally favorable cond that would turn into problems if those conditions normalized. But no could decline to participate for fear of losingmarket share.The instru were untested and potentially defective, but no one was willing to

share.That’s the kind of crowd behavior that typifies . . exacerbates cycles. In theory a bank CEO could have declined to join in this fol the realities of the times,anyone who sat out the dance, lost failed to rake in the “easy money” that his competitors were reaping forced out of his job by activist investors. Thus banksbid aggre opportunity to provide capital as if the musicwould never stop. cognizance of cycles makes it clear that eventually it will. This tolerance and risk obliviousness plays an essential part in the up-ph precedes—and sets the scene for—every dramatic down-phase. As the period 2005–07 was rolling along, it presented a observe events that made manifest market participants’ attitudes and to reach helpful conclusions. I believe the following excer Race to the Bottom,” a memo I wrote on the subject in few months before the first indication that bad times were coming—p an excellent example. It demonstrates the potential value of infer from isolated and perhaps anecdotal experiences: Whilethe last few years have given me many opportunities to marvel at excesses in the capital markets, in this case the one th battle cry—“that calls for a memo”—hit the newspapers in Englan during my last stay. As the Financial Timesreported on Novem 2006: Abbey, the UK’s second-largest home loans provider, has raisedthe standard amount it will lend homebuyersto five times either their singleor joint salaries, eclipsing the traditional borrowing levelsof around three and a half times salary. It followed last week’s decision by Bank of Irel Mortgages and Bristol and West to increase standard salary multiples from four to 4.5 times. In other words, there had been a traditional rule of thumb s borrowers can safelyhandle mortgages with a face amount equal to three-plus times their salaries. But now they can have five times— roughly 50% more. What inference should be drawn? Thereare a least four possibilities: the old standard was too conservative, and the new one’s right; conditions have changed, such that the new standard is as conser for today as the old one was for its times;

it’s reasonable for mortgage lenders to accept higher defaul and thus lower net returns, because their cost of capital has the rush to place money has caused a supplier of capita standards. Now, I am no expert on the U.K. mortgage market, and it intention in this memo to comment on general capital m not any one sector. Further, it’s certainly true that today’s lo interest rates mean a given salarycan support a bigger mortga that’s likely to hold true so long as (1) borrowers keep their jobs a (2) their mortgages carry fixed rates). But if you think Abbey’s r for taking this step mightbe a logical one like that, the q is “why now?” Logical reasons and sober decision making mightbe involved But so mightcompetitionto put out money and the usual late-sta belief that “it’s different this time.” Lenders and investors invariab depart from time-honored disciplines when cycles move to extrem out of a belief that current conditions are different from those th prevailed in the past, when those disciplines were appropriate.And just as invariably, they’re shown that cycles repeatand nothing changes. What did we see in the U.S. mortgage market as home price and interest rates declined? First, low teaserrates. Then higher loanto-value ratios. Then 100%financing. Then low-amortization loans. Then no-amortization loans.Then loans requiring no documentation of employment or credit history. All these thingsmade it possibl more buyers to stretch for more expensive homes, but at th time they made mortgages riskier for lenders. And these developments took place when home priceswere sky-high and interest rates were at multi-generation lows. In the end, buyers to out the biggest mortgage possible given their incomes and prevaili interest rates. Such mortgages would land them in the houses o dreams . . . and leave them there for as long as conditi deteriorate, whichthey invariably do. Do you remember the game Bid-a-Note from the TV show Name That Tune?Contestant x said, “I can name that tune in six notes.” Then contestant y said, “I can name that tune in five notes.” T contestant x said, “I can name that tune in four notes.” The c who eventually got the chance to guess the name of the tune w one who was willing to accept the riskiest proposition—to tr basis of the least information.

So the Bank of Ireland entered the competitionto lend mon home purchases and said, “I’ll lend four and a half times the borrower’s salary.” And Abbey said, “I’ll lend five times.” The s calledwinner in this auction is the one who’ll put out th with the least safety. Whether that’s really winning or losingwill become clear when the cycle turns, as it did in the U.S. last y certainly there’s a race to the bottom going on . . . the institution that’llmake loans with the slightest margin for error. . . . Any way you slice it, standards for mortgage loans have dropped recentyears,and risk has increased. Logic-based? Perhaps. Cycleinduced (and exacerbated)? I’d say so. The FT quoted John-P Crutchley, a banking analyst at Merrill Lynch, as saying Abbey are [sic] lending a multiple of five times salary, th perfectly sensible—or it could be tremendously risky.” Certain mortgage lending was made riskier. We’ll see in a few years w that was intelligent risk taking or excessive competitive ardor.. . Today’s financial market conditions are easilysummed up: Ther a global glut of liquidity, minimal interest in traditional in little apparent concern about risk, and skimpy prospective returns everywhere.Thus, as the price for accessing returns that are potentially adequate (but lower than those promised in the past), investors are readily accepting significant risk in the form of heightened leverage, untested derivatives and weak deal structures. The current cycle isn’t unusual in its form, only its extent. T little mystery about the ultimate outcome, in my opinion, but a point in the cycle it’s the optimists who look best. As is often the case, I could have made this a shorter mem simply invoking my two favorite quotations, both of whichhave a place here. The first is from John Kenneth Galbraith, who passed away last year. I was fortunate to be able to spenda few hours with M Galbraith a year and a half earlier and to have the benefit wisdom firsthand. This quote, once again,is from his invaluable b A Short History of Financial Euphoria. It seemsparticularly apt u the current circumstances: Contributing to . . . euphoria are two further fac noted in our time or in past times.The first is the extreme brevity of the financial memory. In consequence, financial disaster is quickly forgotten. In further consequence, wh same or closely similar circumstances occur again,sometimes

in only a few years,they are hailedby a new, often youthful, and always supremely self-confident generation as a brilliantly innovative discovery in the financial and larger economic world. Therecan be few fields of human endeavor in whichhistory counts for so little as in the worldof Past experience, to the extentthat it is part of memory at dismissed as the primitive refuge of those who do not hav insight to appreciate the incredible wonders of the present. The second is Warren Buffett’s bedrock reminder of the n adjustour financial actions based on the investor behavior playing around us. Fewer words, but probably even more useful: The less prudence with whichothersconduct their affairs, the greater the prudence with whichwe should conduct our ow affairs. This memo can be summed up simply: there’s a race to going on, reflecting a widespread reduction in the level of pruden on the part of investors and capital providers. No one can p point that those who participate will be punished, or that their longrun performance won’texceed that of the naysayers. But that is usual pattern. If you refuseto fall into line in carefree markets like today likely that, for a while, you’ll(a) lag in terms of returnand (b like an old fogey. But neither of those is much of a p means keeping your head (and capital) when otherseventually lose theirs. In my experience, times of laxness have always been f eventually by corrections in whichpenalties are imposed. It may n happen this time, but I’ll take that risk. In the meantime, Oaktree its people will continue to apply the standards that have served well over the last twenty years. Warren Buffett puts it well in the abovequote; it’s one I think it aptly sums up this phenomenon, as well as the contrarian that is required as a result. Whenothersfail to worryabout risk apply caution, as Buffett says, we must turn more cautious. But it be said that when other investors are panicked and depressed and can’t imagine conditions under whichrisk would be worthtaking, we shou aggressive.

What Happens When RiskAversion Is Excessive The symmetry of financial cycles, described at length in chap guaranteed that the risk-tolerantenvironment of 2005–07—and the boom financial instrument issuance that it abetted—would be followed by correction. And, of course, such a correction materialized. As I said earlier, the Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08 pro hope will turn out to be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to witness irrational swingof the pendulum of emotion to total negativity, and the cycle in attitudes toward risk in the direction of excessive The actions that had been abetted by excessive risk tolerance in as just described—were exposed as having been foolhardy, and as they brought great pain and loss: It became clear that the effort to expand home ownership had purchases of homes by many people who couldn’t affordthem. Thousands lost the money they had put into home equity, along moving costs and any improvements they made. Sub-prime mortgages that had been issued without proof of incom employment were shown to have been unwise. Weakmortgage lending practices—along with extensive mortgage fraud that those practices failed to catch—turned out, not surprisingly, led to the issuance of many mortgages on whichborrowers were to make the required payments. The extrapolation of low historic default rates on mortgages have ignored the possibility that weakened mortgage lending practic would result in defaults at unprecedented rates. Since actualdefaults exceeded the historic rates that had been the for security structuring decisions, debt ratings and loss projections, structured and levered securities that had been built from sub-prime mortgages also defaulted in stunning numbers, proving their high to have been erroneous. Levered mortgage backed securities (and financial derivatives, most whichcontain high levelsof built-in leverage) generally switched being return-enhancing tools to weapons of financial mass destruction, as levered funds and securities breached loan covenants, and issuer ultimately proved unable to service their debt. Of course, the new financial products demonstrated—as usual—that financial innovations promising high returns with low risk rarelykeep that promise.

As for the relaxed regulations, the financial conglomerates permit revocation of the Glass-Steagall Act had extensive problems; the of the uptick rule allowed the stocks of financial institu down relentlessly;and several banksproved unable to survive high levelsof leverage that had been allowed. Because of everything that had gone before, the consequences inc massive mortgage defaults and home repossessions; downgradings and failures on the part of mortgage backed securities; collapsing home the inability to sell existing homes; collapsing stock and corporate markets and the disappearance of liquidity; a total drying up availability;and failures, bailouts and bankruptcies at a number Of course, it’s improbable events that brought on the credit c Lots of bad thingshappened that had been considered unlikely (if n impossible),and they happened at the same time, to investors who’d taken on significant leverage. (“TheLimits to Negativism,” Octobe 2008) What was the cumulative psychological effect of all of the aboveon investors and other financial-system participants? In short, it scared death.Whentotal fear replaces a high degree of confidence, excessive aversion takes the place of unrealistic risk tolerance. And that’s what happened in late 2008 following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. came forward in droves, exhibiting a high degree of urgency. the sidelines. Asset pricescollapsed. And market liquidity went to zero. All these thingsresulted from the replacementof high risk tolerance wi high risk aversion. And they all contributed to still more fear, still more aversion, further negative events, and widespread fear of more of The same people who had bought untried instruments on the basis assumptions and promises that were too good to be true now were that the entire financial system mightmelt down. To provide an example of the swingtoward excessive risk av impact, I’ll share the story of something that happened a few week Lehman bankruptcy. It’s the event that inspired me to write my low-p memo quoted above, “The Limits to Negativism.” Participating to a minordegree in the general trendsthat we Oaktree formed its first levered funds in the years just preceding We used less leverage than others—for example, four times equity in European seniorloan fund versus the more conventional seven or eight we tried to be conservative about what assetswe bought, but even nevertheless brought us to the brink of a meltdown. Prior to

or “leveraged” loans—even those with credit problems—had rarelytraded pricesbelow96 cents on the dollar. Thus we felt we were well insul the possibility of margin calls (demands from lenders for additional capital) that, under our borrowing agreement, could come only if the avera market price of the loans in the portfolio got down to 88. But in the aftermath of the Lehman bankruptcy, loan pricesfell to unprecedented levels, pressured by, among other things, banks’ portfolios abandoned by levered holders who received margin calls own and failed to meet them. Thus 88—and a margin call and meltd became a real possibility for us. We were able to get time to lender, and we set about raising additional equity from the fund with whichto reduce the fund’s leverage from 4-to-1to 2-to-1. asked the investors to put up more additional equity, they understood represented an opportunity to retain loans at discounted pricesratherthan give up on them; to enjoy the loans’high implied yields; and to bene fund’s low-cost leverage. Thus most of them came forward with the equity we requested. At the newlyreduced level of leverage, the protected from a margin call unless the average price of our unimaginable 65. But with the total absence of buyers and the continuation of and hedge-fund-withdrawal-related selling, the loan market continued spiral downward, as the notion of “the right price”gave way to wide concern that no price could be counted on to hold. Thus the avera our loan portfolio neared 70. It fell to me to get the lever 1 to 1-to-1, in whichcase we could completely eliminate the contr covenant that introduced the risk of a margin call. Now I was offering the fund’s investors a chance to pa loans at yieldsto maturity that were well into double digits, and returns on the overall fund in the 20s (before fees and poten defaults). Of course, if a pre-existinginvestor failed to put up share of the additional equity and allowed someone else to do would be tantamount to selling off part of his interest in those yields. And yet, the combination of non-stop price declines, portfolio liq and a total absence of buyers made it challenging for some fund take the step of again adding capital. Some were fatigued from havin with the issuespopping up everywhere in their portfolios. Some viewed chance not as rescuing their investments, but as possibly “thro money after bad.” Some didn’thave liquidfunds on hand. And some just didn’thave the willingness to defend additional investment to their bosse bottoms, it can be extremely hard to take actions that require staunchness. And that led to the event I’m going to describe.

I went to a pension fund that was an investor in the fun for an additional equity investment. The yieldsI laid out were attrac admitted, but they were worried about the possibility of loan defaults. conversation went like this: Pension fund: What about the potential that defaults will render the investment unsuccessful? HM: Well, our average default rate over the last 26 years in hig bonds—which are juniorin the capital structure to loans like the has been about 1% a year (and bear in mind that there are recoveries case of default, meaning our credit losseshave been less than a perce year). Thus defaults at our historic rate would do little to dimin promised returnin the 20s. Pension fund: But what if it’s worsethan that? HM: The worst five-year period we’veever had showed defaults av 3% per year; obviously not a problem relative to the yieldswe’re about. Pension fund: But what if it’s worsethan that? HM: The average default rate in the high yield bond universe—with assuming any ability to avoid defaults through skillful credit selec been 4.2% per year. Resulting credit lossesof 2–3%clearly wouldn’t do much to jeopardize the results on this investment. Pension fund: But what if it’s worsethan that? HM: The worst five years in history for the universe averaged 7.3 not a problem. Pension fund: But what if it’s worsethan that? HM: The worst one-year default rate in high yield bond history wa That still leaves plenty of returnhere. Pension fund: But what if it’s worsethan that? HM: One and a half times the worst year in history would be would still make a little money given the portfolio yield in the such a minimal returnto be the result, defaults of that order would have to happen every year—not just once. Pension fund: But what if it’s worsethan that? At this point I asked, “Do you have any equities?” and I tol did—and really believed the doomsday scenarios toward whichthey had pushing me—they’dbetter leave the room immediately and sell them all. My point is that, in a negative environment, excessive risk av cause people to subject investmentsto unreasonable scrutiny and negative assumptions (just as they may have performed little or no and applied rosy assumptions when they made investmentsin the prece headytimes). During panics, people spend100%of their time maki

there can be no losses. . . at just the time that they shou about missing out on great opportunities. In times of extreme negativism, exaggeratedrisk aversion is likely to pricesto already be as low as they can go; further lossesto and thus the risk of loss to be minimal. As I’ve indicated earlie thing in the worldis the belief that there’s no risk. By the same safest (and most rewarding) time to buy usually comes when everyone convinced there’s no hope. If I could ask only one question regarding each investment I ha consideration, it would be simple: How much optimism is facto price?A high level of optimism is likely to mean the favorable possi developments have been priced in; the price is high relative to and there’s little margin for error in case of disappointment. But is low or absent, it’s likely that the price is low; expectations negative surprises are unlikely; and the slightest turn for the bette result in appreciation. The pension fund meeting described abovewas important for the simple reason that it indicated that all optim wrung out of investors’ thinking. After that meeting, I practically ran to my officeto write “The Li Negativism” at roughly the point in that cycle when one could have the most debt at the lowest prices. In it I shared the Lots of bad thingshappened that had been considered unlikely (if n impossible),and they happened at the same time, to investors who’d taken on significant leverage. So the easy explanation is that the people who were hurt in the credit crisis hadn’t been skeptical—or pessimistic—enough. But that triggered an epiphany: Skepticism and pessimism aren’t synonymous. Skepticism calls for pessimism when optimism is excessive. But it also calls for optimism when pessimism is excessi I’ll write some more on the subject, but it’s really as simple a Contrarianism—doing the opposite of what othersdo, or “leaning against the wind”—is essential for investment success. But as th credit crisis reached a peak last week,people succumbed to the w ratherthan resisting. I foundvery few who were optimistic; most were pessimistic to some degree. Some became genuinely depressed—even a few great investors I know. Increasingly negative tales o coming meltdown were exchanged via email. No one applied skepticism, or said “that horror story’s unlikely to be true.” Pessimism fed on itself. People’s only concern was bullet-proofing their portfolios to get through the coming collapse, or raising cash to meet redemptions. The one thing they weren’t doing last w

was making aggressive bids for securities. So pricesfell and fell several pointsat a time—the old expression is “gapped down.” Hopefully this contemporary account will give you a sense for wh excessive, unreasonable risk aversion feels like, and also a sense for should be doing under circumstances like those. Postscript: a few of the fund’s investors (including the one I day) declined to post the additional equity. Feeling I should could to keep the fund afloat, I put it up in their place.The a levered portfolio of depressed seniorloans at a time of highl aversion made that one of the best investmentsI’ve ever made . . unwillingness of othersto participate in that market had rendered absurdly cheap. ∾ This chapter regarding the cycle in attitudes toward risk has grow of the longest in this book. There’s a good reason for that: one of the most important cycles. In The Most Important Thing, talks about the importance of knowing wherewe stand in the various Understanding how investors are thinking about and dealing with risk perhaps the most important thing to strive for. In short, excessive risk tolerance contributes to the creation of danger, and the swingto aversion depresses markets, creating some of the greatest buying opportunities. The rational investor is diligent, skeptical and appropriately ris all times,but also on the lookout for opportunities for potential more than compensates for risk. That’s the ideal. But in good times most people say, “Risk? What risk? I don’t see much that could go look how well thingshave been going. And anyway, risk is my frien more risk I take, the more money I’m likely to make.” Then, in they switch to something simpler: “I don’t care if I ever make in the market; I just don’t want to lose any more. Get me out!” It’s essential to note that since rational, unemotional investors are much in the minority, the totality of investors rarelyachieve equil regarding their attitudes toward risk, or any of the other aspects or emotion as to whichthe cycle oscillates or the pendulum swin not to maintain a healthy balance between the risk aversion to be cautious and the risk tolerance that urges them on: usually other is in the pronounced ascendency.The same is very much true with regard to greed and fear, skepticism and credulousness, the willingness sometimes see only positives and sometimes only negatives, and many other

things. The cycles in psychology amply demonstratethat investors little of their time at the happymedium. The fluctuation—or inconstancy—in attitudes toward risk is both the of some cycles and the cause or exacerbator of others. And it on, since it seemsto be hard-wired into most people’s psyches to more optimistic and risk-tolerantwhen thingsare going well, and then more worried and risk-averse when thingsturn downward. That means they’re willing to buy when they should be most cautious, and most reluc when they should be most aggressive. Superior investors recognize this strive to behave as contrarians.