IX THE CREDIT CYCLE Superior investing doesn’t come from buying high-qualityassets, b from buying when the deal is good, the price is low, the potenti returnis substantial, and the risk is limited. Theseconditions are much more the case when the credit markets are in the less-euphoric more-stringent part of their cycle.The slammed-shut phase of the credit cycle probably does more to make bargains available than any other singlefactor. Now our foundation is complete. We’ve covered the economic cycles that provide the fundamental backdrop for investment activ also the psychological and attitudinal swings that occur in response changes in fundamentals (and that tend to exaggerate them). Now to take up some specific types of financial cycles. You will note fluctuations in all the abovestrongly affect the cycles covered in following chapters. As we’vealready discussed, some activities—like home buying—are highly responsive to movements in the economic cycle,and others—lik purchasing food—are not. Some cycles have a profound effect on other aspects of the economy and on other cycles, and some do not. this chapter, the credit cycle,is in each case the former: it is responsive to economic developments and highly influential. Lastly, extremely volatile. Thus its movements are powerful and extreme, and greatly affect activity in many other areas. And all these thingsare exacerbated by the swings of psychology described in chapters VII Please note that the subject here is sometimes referred to as market cycle ratherthan the credit cycle.I don’t find the distinction important. Strictly speaking, “capital” refers to all the money used a business, while “credit” refers to that portion of a company’s made up of debt ratherthan equity. In practice, these two cycle name be used interchangeably, although I do find many fewer references to capital market cycle.I’m going to stick to “the credit cycle” when

talking about debt markets, and I may lapse into “the capital mark when I’m talking about the general availability of financing. But eithe and most importantly,the considerations that apply to one apply equally the other. The following passage from my memo “Open and Shut” (Decemb calls on some of what I wrote earlier and places the credit cycle within the range of cycles: Consider this: the ups and downs of economies are usually b fluctuations in corporate profits, and fluctuations in profits for th and fall of securities markets. However, in recessions and recover economic growth usually deviates from its trendline rate by o few percentage points. Why, then, do corporate profits increase a decrease so much more? The answer lies in thingslike financi leverage and operating leverage, whichmagnify the impact on p of rising and falling revenues. And if profits fluctuate this way—more than GDP, but still relatively moderately—why is it that the securities markets soar a collapse so dramatically? I attribute this to fluctuations in p and, in particular, to the profound influence of psychology on th availability of capital. In short, whereas economies fluctuate a little and profits a the credit window openswide and then slams shut . . . thus th this memo. I believe the credit cycle is the most volatile o and has the greatest impact. Thus it deserves a great deal o And here’show I put it, more succinctly, in “You Can’t Predict. Yo Prepare.” (November 2001): The longer I’m involved in investing, the more impressed I a power of the credit cycle.It takes only a small fluctuation in th economy to produce a large fluctuation in the availability of c with great impact on asset pricesand back on the economy itself. Changes in the availability of capital or credit constitute one of fundamental influences on economies, companies and markets. Even thoug the credit cycle is less well-knownto the man on the street than most other cycles discussed in this book, I consider it to be of importance and profound influence. As suggested in the citation just above, the credit cycle can be understood through the metaphor of a window. In short, sometimes and sometimes it’s closed. And, in fact, people in the financial

frequent reference to just that: “the credit window,” as in “the place borrow money.” Whenthe window is open, financing is plentiful obtained, and when it’s closed, financing is scarce and hard to it’s essential to always bear in mind that the window can go to slammed shut in just an instant. There’s a lot more to this cycle—including the reasons for these cyclical movements and their impact—but that’s the bottom line. ∾ Why does this cycle have the importance I ascribe to it? First, capit is an essential ingredient in the productive process. Thus the abilit companies (and economies) to grow usually depends on the availability incremental capital. If the capital markets are closed, it can growth. Second, capital must be available in order for maturing debt to refinanced. Companies (as well as most other economic units, such as governments and consumers) generally don’t pay off their debts.Most of time they merely roll them over. But if a company is unable at the time that its existing debt comes due, it may default bankruptcy. Where we stand in the credit cycle—whether credit is readi available or difficult to obtain—is the greatest determinantof whet can be refinanced at a given time. Manycorporate assetsare long-term in nature (like buildings, machine vehicles and goodwill). Yet corporations often raise the money with buy those thingsby issuing short-term debt. They do this because the borrowing is generally lowest on short maturities. This arrangement —“borrowing short to investlong”—works out well most of the time, the credit market is open and fully functioning,meaning debt can be over with ease when it comes due. But the mismatch between longassetsthat can’t be easilyliquidated and shorter-term liabilities can easily bring on a crisis if the credit cycle turns negative so that maturing be refinanced. This classic mismatch, when combined with stringency in financing markets, is often the cause of the most spectacular financial meltdowns. Whenthe Global Financial Crisisbeganto build in 2007 and the cre markets froze up, the U.S. Department of the Treasury took the unprecedented step of guaranteeing all commercial paper. If it these debt instruments—which have maturities of 270 days or less—migh not have been capable of being rolledover, and thus could have caused defaults among even the strongest of companies. In fact, the defau well have been concentrated among top companies, since they issue commercial paper in billions precisely for the reason that their stron

creditworthiness gives them easy access to the commercial paper market. (The importance of the market being open—and of the ability to maturing paper—underlines the essential difference between positive worthand liquidity. Even a wealthy company can get into trouble have cash on hand and can’t obtain enough to meet its debt matu and other calls on cash as they arise.) Third, financial institutions represent a special, exaggeratedcase of on the credit markets. Financial institutions are in the business of money, and they need access to financing to keep that business also are often the site of the greatest short/long mismatches and poten meltdowns. Consider, for example, the bank that takes deposits that can withdrawn any day and uses them to make mortgage loans that won’tbe repaid for thirty years.What happens if all the depositors demand back on the same bad day (a “run on the bank”)? If there’s credit market (and no governmentbailout), that bank may fail. Fourth and finally, the credit market gives off signals that ha psychological impact. A closed credit market causes fear to of proportion to businesses’ negative realities. Difficult conditions can the capital market to close . . . and closed capital impact on business conditions (as well as on market participants businesses).This kind of “vicious circle” is part of most financial The Credit Cycle in Operation By now you should have an understanding of the nature and credit cycle.The next topic to tackleis why credit cycles occur: what credit to be more available at some times and less available at other The credit window doesn’t have a mind of its own, opening an its own accord. Rather, it follows events elsewhere. In “You You Can Prepare.” (November 2001), I put the expand-and-contract in context and explained it in some detail: The process is simple: The economy moves into a period of prosperity. Providers of capital thrive, increasing their capital base. Because bad news is scarce, the risks entailed in lending investing seem to have shrunk. Risk averseness disappears.

Financial institutions move to expand their businesses—that is, to provide more capital. They compete for market share by lowering demanded returns (e.g., cutting interest rates), lowering credit standards, providin more capital for a given transaction, and easing covenants. At the extreme, providers of capital finance borrowers and p that aren’tworthy of being financed. As The Economist said earlier this year, “the worst loans are made at the best of times.” This le capital destruction—that is, to the investment of capital in p wherethe cost of capital exceeds the returnon capital, and e to cases wherethere is no returnof capital. Whenthis point is reached, the up-leg is reversed. Losses cause lenders to become discouragedand shy away. Risk averseness rises, and along with it, interest rates, credit restrictions and covenant requirements. Less capital is made available—and at the trough of th only to the most qualified of borrowers. Companies become starved for capital. Borrowers are unable roll over their debts,leading to defaults and bankruptcies. This process contributes to and reinforces the economic contraction. Of course, at the extreme the process is ready to be r Because the competitionto make loans or investmentsis low, high returns can be demanded along with high creditworthiness. Contrarians who commit capital at this point have a shot at h returns, and those tempting potential returns begin to draw in c In this way, a recovery begins to be fueled. Sometimes people are eager to put money to work, and that ma credit window open wide. But when circumstances cause them to change minds, financing can become unavailable.As with so many other thing this book, it’s essential that the reader gain a clear understanding workings of the cycles, and especially of the way in whicheach to the next. Thus the thorough, step-by-stepexplanation provided here is essential and must be absorbed. But in “You Can’t Predict. You Can Prepare.” I went on to red process to just a few words. They truly do constitute the botto credit cycle,and they make clear the never-ending chain-reaction nature the cycle:

Prosperity brings expanded lending, whichleads to unwise lending whichproduces large losses, whichmakes lenders stop lending, w ends prosperity, and on and on. A market is an auction housewherethe item being offered go person who’ll pay the most for it. The financial markets are opportunity to make an investment or provide a loan goes to the participant who’ll pay the most for that opportunity.The bidding takes price to higher dollarlevelsand higher valuation parameters (such as price/earnings ratios). In the credit market, a high price or high parameter translates directly into a low yield on the debt instrument question, and the chance to provide capital goes to the lende the lowest yield. My memo “The Race to the Bottom,” published in February 20 primarily about the eagerness of providers of capital to expand business” in good times,and its effect: It helps to think of money as a commodity.Everyone’s money prettymuch the same. Yet institutions seeking to add to loan volume and private equity funds and hedgefunds seeking to increase th fees, all want to move more of it. So if you want to place m —that is, get people to go to you instead of your c financing—you have to make your money cheaper. As with the o commodities, low price is the most dependable route to increased market share. One way to lower the price for your money is by reducing interest rate you charge on loans.A slightly more subtleway is agree to a higher price for the thing you’re buying, such a a higher p/e ratio for a common stock or a higher to price when you’re buying a company. Any way you slice it, y settling for a lower prospective return. But there are other ways to cheapen your money, and they’re the primary subject of th With debt, structure is important. Thus easierterms for the borrower ca bring addedrisk for the lender. For example, lenders would like protective covenants that limit the extentto whicha borrower can enga certain actions that increase the risk that is present. They may debt the borrower can assume, limit the cash it can pay out in require that it maintain a certain minimum net worth. But, credit market is heated, the “best buyer” of debt—the most eager

mightbe willing to accept a structure with fewer covenants, and risk. So in an auction, the chance to make a loan or buy a the provider of capital who’swilling to accept a combinatio and the riskiest structure. Whenrisk aversion is present and the lending opportunities is reasonable relative to the supply of opportunities, the bidding is usually prudent. But when risk tolera over and lenders compete avidly for opportunities, the bidding become overheated. The resulting opportunity to lend is likely to be high a price: a yield that’s too low and/or risk that’s excessive. Thus overheated auction in the credit market—as elsewhere—is likely to produ “winner” who’sreally a loser. This is the process I call the race On the other hand, there are times when buyers show up for auctions small numbers, and the few who do attendare interested in buying giveaway prices. The bidding stalls, and the result is low prices, yields, and loan structures that affordexcellent protection. Unlike the overheated climate that spawns the race to the bottom, ice-cold whichno one’s eager to lend can createreal winners. The degree of openness of the credit window depends almost whether providers of capital are eager or reticent, and it has impact on economies, companies, investors, and the prospective returnand riskiness of the investment opportunities that result. In the short term, the effect of generous capital market conditi make more money available to more companies for more reasons, a lower rates of interest and with fewer covenants. This leads to higher levelsof acquisitions, buyouts and corporate expansion (not to mention rapid recapitalizations of buyout companies and thus high short-term rates of return). In the short run, this contributes to a level of general financial activity. Another effect is to forestall financial stringency at weak companies. Whenlenders are strict and covenants are tight, operating problems can lead quickly to both technical defaults (violations o covenants) and “money defaults” (non-payment of interest or principal). But looserconditions can permit default to be forestal if covenants are lax or absent; if borrowers have the option cash-pay bondsinto payment-in-kind bonds(through a recent innovation, “toggle bonds”); or if they can raise new money a postpone the day of reckoning. Eventually, many of the forestalled defaults will demonstratetheir inevitability, with the companies falling from more highly leverag heights. And certainly the capital markets’ willingness to finance

than-deserving companies will lead ultimately to a higher level o corporate distress. Thus, everything else being equal,the bigger the boom—and the greater the excesses of the capital markets in upward direction—the greater the bust. Timing and extentare n predictable, but the occurrence of cycles is the closest thing I inevitable. (“TheRace to the Bottom,” February 2007) The Impact of the Credit Cycle One of the main pointsin this book is the extentto whichevents cycle have influence in other fields and on other kinds of cycles. Now this clearer than in the credit cycle. In “Genius Isn’t Enough” on the subject of Long-Term Capital Management (October 1998), I wrote “Look around the n there’s a crisis;you’llprobably find a lender.” Over-permissive providers of capital frequently aid and abet financial bubbles. T have been numerous recentexamples whereloose capital markets contributed to booms that were followed by famous collapses: r estate in 1989–92; emerging markets in 1994–98; Long-Term Capital in 1998; the movie exhibition industry in 1999–2000;venture c funds and telecommunications companies in 2000–01. In each case, lenders and investors provided too much cheapmoney and the r was over-expansion and dramatic losses. In the movie Fields Dreams KevinCostner was told, “If you build it, they will come.” the financial world, if you offer cheapmoney, they will borrow and build—often without discipline, and with very negative consequences. The capital cycle contributed tremendously to the tech bubble. Money from venture capital funds caused far too many compan be created, often with little in terms of business justificationor p prospects. Wild demand for IPOs caused their hot stocks to r meteorically, enabling venture funds to reporttriple-digit returns a attract still more capital requiring speedy deployment. The g of the capital markets let telecom companies sign on for h projects that were only partially financed, secure in the knowle that more financing would be available later, at higher p/e’s a interest rates as the projects were further along. This ease c more optical fiber capacity to be built than was needed at th lot of whichis sitting idle. Muchof the investment that went in

may never be recovered. Once again,easy money has led to capital destruction. In making investments, it has become my habit to worr the economic future—which I’m sure I can’t know much about—than I do about the supply/demand picture relating to capital. B positioned to make investmentsin an uncrowded arena conveys vast advantages. Participating in a field that everyone’s throwing money is a formula for disaster. (“You Can’t Predict. You Can P To restate, here’sfurther proof from “The Happy Medium” (July 20 a lengthy and important description like that abovewith regard to process can be summed up in fewer words: From time to time, providers of capital simply turn the spigoto off—as in so many things, to excess. Thereare times when a can get any amount of capital for any purpose, and times w the most deserving borrowers can’t access reasonable amounts for worthwhile projects. The behavior of the capital markets is a indicator of wherewe stand in terms of psychology and a great contributor to the supply of investment bargains. I went on in that memo to discuss the way in whichthe contributes to the creation of excess: Looking for the cause of a market extreme usually require the videotape of the credit cycle a few months or years.Most r bull markets are abetted by an upsurge in the willingness to capital, usually imprudently. Likewise, most collapses are precede by a wholesale refusal to finance certain companies, industri entire gamut of would-be borrowers. My goal in what follows is to describe the effect of the cre do so I’ll returnagain to the Global Financial Crisis(GFC), since the best teaching moments. In the late 1960s, in my early years as an equity analyst, of the economic cycle and the way corporate profits rise and fall to it. WhileI had a lot more to learn, I already knew a psychology and risk attitudes (and about their importance). But I had no appreciation for the role or operation of the credit cycle.In to fully understand most phenomena in the investment worldunless you’v lived through them. Now I’ve come to the conclusion that the credit cycle

really big deal. In fact, when asked about the causes of the Global Crisisof 2007–08, I put it right at the top of the list. The very choice of the name “Global Financial Crisis” for the 2007–08 experience reflects the fact that it was essentially a finan phenomenon—caused almost entirely by events within the finan —andnot one with primarily economic or other origins. Here are the attitudinal and behavioral factors in the financial worldthat led to reaching crisis: The existential cause was the too-liberal attitudes toward financial described on pages 119–120. Thosecarefree attitudes were inflamed by strong demand for yielding investmentsthat resulted from the Fed’s lowering of genera interest rates. Thosetwo factors led to, among other things, an excessive on the part of investors to accept innovative financial produ swallow wholethe favorable extrapolation of history and the optimistic assumptions on whichthose products were based. The predominance of mortgage backed securities among those innovations gave rise to a rapidly increasing need for mortgages whichto fashion the new securities. That demand facilitated the selling onward of mortgages, which allowed mortgage lenders to be careless in choosing the home buyers to whom they would lend. Since mortgage origin wouldn’t be retaining the mortgages they created, they didn’thave worryabout their soundness. In an extreme example of this trend, category of “sub-prime” mortgages was created for borrowers couldn’t satisfy traditional lending standards in terms of emplo income, or who chose to pay higher interest rates ratherthan these things. The fact that weak borrowers like these could borrow sums was indicative of irrational credit market conditions. Relaxed credit diligence on the part of mortgage lenders, and availability to home buyers of generous sub-prime financing, made ownership possible for more Americans than ever, including many who wouldn’t have been able to affordit under the tighter traditional mortgage standards. Seduced by potential profits from ratingvast numbers of securi backed by sub-prime mortgages (and enabled by their own naivet perhaps their greed), the credit-rating agencies competed for offering inflated ratings, in a race to the bottom of Homeaffordability increased substantially, fueled by the fact interest rates are low on short maturities, as originators hit upon

initialmonthly payments as a way to maximize mortgage issuan contributed to the widespread use of floating-rate mortgages entaili low starting monthly payments based on low initial“teaser” rates interest. Obviously, these non-fixed rates poseda potential risk to borrowers who could barely affordtheir payments before they increa But borrowers were assured that, thanks to the generous capita conditions, they would always be able to refinance into yet mortgage, again with a sub-market teaserrate. Investment bankswere eager to turn the raw material of plentiful primemortgages into tranched mortgage backed securities with the highest average credit rating, in order to maximize their salabi ardor for this activity at just the time that “financial engineering” into favor gave rise to ratings for tranches that turned out totally divorced from how they actually would perform under The investment banksthat created and sold these securities often were willing to retain the equity layer at the bottom of the in order to facilitate a high volume of issuance or simply to hold high-yielding assets(i.e., even they were oblivious to the nature of their product). And other bankstook advantage of the levelsof permissible leverage to createassetsat very favorable yield spreads by using low-cost borrowings to buy the risky, high-yieldin equity and juniordebt tranches of structured mortgage securities. As you can see from the above, virtually all the conditions on GFC was built were endogenousto the financial system and the credi The developments that constituted the foundation for the Crisisweren’t caused by a general economic boom or a widespread surge in profits. The key events didn’ttake place in the general business or the greater worldbeyond that. Rather, the GFC was a large phenomenon that resulted entirely from the behavior of financial main forcesthat created this cycle were the easy availability of capital; of experience and prudence sufficient to temper the unbridled enthu pervaded the process; imaginative financial engineering; the separation lending decisions from loan retention; and irresponsibility and downright greed. It must be noted, however, that this chain reaction was abetted officials who were eager to expand the American dream of home and naively thought it would be great if everyone was enab In a speech in October 2002, President George W. Bush repea been told by one of his friends: “You don’t have to have a lousy first-time home buyers. If you put your mind to it, the first-time the low-incomehome buyer can have just as nice a houseas anybody

wonder if the people who heard that statement at the time found as it seemstoday. After the GFC hit, Congressman Barney Frank, formerly one of strongest proponents of broadened home ownership, said: “Home ownership is a good thing. But we have made a great mistake in this socie people in the society who should not be allowed to borro home. And we have pushed people into home ownership who shou there.” (As you can see, political rhetoric is cyclical, too.) In other words, the events that provided the basis for the GF all about money. The pursuit of money took a powerful upsw economic realities that reflect on and constrain the attainment of often ignored. And the caution and risk aversion that usually bear willingness of market participants to provide money were largely Thus the capital cycle rose to an irrational extreme, the consequenc whichare generally foreseeable. Whenthe cycle rises to an extreme, it invariably can’t stay there for Sometimes it corrects under its own weight, and sometimes this happ because of events outside the cycle.In this case it was more the laying of the foundation for the Crisis, the unraveling of essentially all financial in nature, although the first step came from world.” Most influentially, in 2006, sub-prime mortgage borrowers beganto default in large numbers. Some of the borrowers, who had receiv without proving their ability to make payments, turned out unable. Some loans,secured through fraud,went bad when fictitious borrowers disappeared. Other loans,for the full home purchase price— whichhad allowed home buyers to gamble on continued home appreciation without risking any money of their own—were when the market stopped rising. Regardless of the reason, the historic basis that allowed sub-pr mortgage backed securities to achieve high leverage and high insistence that there wouldn’t be a nationwide wave of mortgage —failed to hold. As it turned out, lending decisions had unwisely, with unduereliance on that history. Importantly, lender investors had ignored the chance that such reliance would lending behavior so careless that it in itself would render irrelevant. Largenumbers of mortgage defaults led to downgradings, coven breaches and payment defaults on mortgage backed securities. The downgradings, breaches and defaults caused the pricesof backed securities to collapse, and the resultant loss of confid

the market liquidity for these instruments to dry up. With terrified buyers taking to the sidelines—and terrified increasinglyeager to sell (or forced to sell by margin calls)— was a dramatic downward spiral in the pricesof mortgage backe securities. Thesenegative developments collided head-on with new regulations, designed to increase transparency, whichrequired banks’ assets “marked to market.” But with pricesin free-fall and liquidity existent, it was hard to have faith in any price chosen. When marked down their assetsto be appropriately conservative, the lossesshocked investors, contributingto further panic,whichcaused pricesto decline further, and so on. In many cases the very viability of bankscame into question. Many to be absorbed by other banks(with support from the government) bailedout by the government. Each bank failure, acquisition (at pennies on the dollar) or brought lossesto investors and further sapped confidence. In the interlockingrelationships among bankscaused grave concern regarding the remaining ones’ ability to rely on amounts due others. “Counterparty risk” became the newest source of Banks reported massive losses. The rising pricesquoted for swaps—derivatives used to bet against banks’ creditworthiness— increased odds of insolvency. Shareholders dumped bank stocks response, forcing down their prices. Short sellers sold unremittingl adding to the downward pressure, rendering their pessimistic predic self-fulfilling, and further extending the vicious circle. Ultimately, Lehman Brothers was denied absorption or bailout, to its bankruptcy. That collapse, when addedto the many other unsett events taking place simultaneously, led to nothing short of Whereas the markets had reacted adversely to the problems in mid-2007 but overlooked the potential for contagion to other late 2008 everyone threw in the towel on everything. The pricesof assetsother than Treasurys and gold collapsed. Fundsthat had invested using borrowed capital—“leverage” or “margin”—saw asset values marked down precipitously and receiv demands from lenders to post additional capital. Whenthey appea the banksfor more time, the banksgenerally couldn’t or wouldn’t it. The result was distressed selling of portfolios en masse, increased the downward pressure on prices. The capital markets slammed shut in this environment, meani financing became virtually impossible in all quarters of the markets, even those totally unrelated to homes and mortgages.

Giventhe sum of the above, all economic units pulled back, buy, investor expand. The result was an economic retrenchment been labeled “the Great Recession.” Taken to its extreme in the last fifteen weeks of 20 the credit cycle seemed universal and unstoppable. Few people were imagine any forcescapable of arresting it or—as described in —anyhypothetical scenario that was too dire to come true. A total of the financial system was considered a real possibility. The bottom line is that the willingness of potential providers o to make it available on any given day fluctuates violently, with a profound impact on the economy and the markets. There’s n that the recentcredit crisis was as bad as it was because the c markets froze up and capital became unavailable other than from governments. (“Open and Shut”) I truly believe a system meltdown—with ramifications like tho the Great Depression—could have occurred. Former Treasury secretary Timothy Geithner’s book StressTest bears this out. Fortunately,however, the U.S. governmenttook steps that turned the tide. Theseincluded the guaranteeing of commercial paper, mentioned earlier, as well as market funds. The bank bailouts showed that help was available, September 2008 bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers suggested that the governmentwas differentiating between the banksthat were worthsaving those that weren’t. Whereas panicky market participants were convinced Morgan Stanley was next in line for collapse after Lehman—and Goldman Sachswould follow that—the downward spiral was arrested Japan’s Mitsubishi UFJ went through with a promised $9 billion in Morgan Stanley. Importantly, events in the credit markets eventually demonstrated cycles can’t go in one direction forever, even given widespread catac events. Debt priceswere generally in free-fall from the time of the bankruptcy on September 15 through the end of 2008. By the end however, the ingredients for a solid market recovery were in place The over-levered funds that had received margin calls either raised additional capital, sold assetsto de-lever as required, or liquid Fundsand investment managers that received notices from investors desiring to withdraw at year-end either put up “gates” postpo withdrawalsor completed the asset sales needed to meet them.

The pricesof debt securities reached a point wherethey implied so high that selling was unpalatable and buying became attract And, ultimately, market participants demonstrated that when negative psychology is universal and “things can’t get any worse,” they Whenall optimism has been driven out, and panicked risk aversi everywhere,it becomes possible to reach a point wherepricescan’t any lower. And when priceseventually stop going down, people feel relief,and so the potential for a price recovery begins The quoted pricesfor debt continued downward in the first quarter as composure, confidence and a “base” of buying power had full. But the ability of investors to buy in large scale dried up began, because of the factors listed just above. And when buyin materialized in the second quarter—perhaps because distressed debt came to the realization that they had shrunk unreasonably from the task of “catching a falling knife”—the dearth of supply for a powerful move to the upside. The Global Financial Crisisshows the credit cycle at the greatest since the Great Depression. Debt markets historically had been marked by general conservatism, meaning excesses on the upside were limit bubbles took place in the equity market. Certainly it was the Crashof 1929. But the creation of the high yield bond market in the late 19 liberalization of debt investing, and the generally positive economic environment of the subsequent three decades provided those who ventu with a favorable overall experience. This combination led to a toward acceptance of low-rated and non-traditional debt instruments. Therewere periods of weakness in debt in 1990–91 (related to bankruptcies among the highly levered buyouts of the 1980 (stemming from excessive borrowing to fund overbuilding in the telec industry, whichled to prominent downgradesthat coincided with several high-profilecorporate accounting scandals). But the effects of these were limited because of the isolated nature of their causes. It that the financial markets witnessed the first widespread,debt-induced with ramifications for the entire economy. Thus the GFC provided the ultimate example of the credit cycle’s full effect. ∾ As I described it in “Open and Shut,” the capital mark operation, and its message is easy to perceive. An uptight, cauti market usually stems from, leads to or connotes thingslike these:

fear of losingmoney heightened risk aversion and skepticism unwillingness to lend and investregardless of merit shortages of capital everywhere economic contraction and difficulty refinancing debt defaults, bankruptcies and restructurings low asset prices, high potential returns, low risk and excessive premiums Taken together, these thingsare indicative of a great time to in course, however, because of the role played by fear and r in their creation, most people shy away from investing while they a in force. That makes it difficult for most people to investw capital cycle is negative, just as it is potentially lucrative. On the other hand, a generous capital market is usually with the following: fear of missing out on profitable opportunities reduced risk aversion and skepticism (and, accordingly, reduced diligence) too much money chasing too few deals willingness to buy securities in increased quantity willingness to buy securities of reduced quality high asset prices, low prospective returns, high risk and skimpy premiums It’s clear from this list of elements that excessive generosity in th capital markets stems from a shortage of prudence and thus s give investors one of the clearest red flags. The wide-open capital market arises when the news is good, asset pricesare rising, optimis is ridinghigh, and all thingsseem possible. But it invariably brings the issuance of unsound and overpriced securities, and the incurre of debt levelsthat ultimately will result in ruin. The point about the quality of new issue securities in a wide capital market deserves particular attention. A decrease in r aversion and skepticism—and increased focus on making sure opportunities aren’tmissed ratherthan on avoiding losses—makes investors open to a greater quantity of issuance. The same f make investors willing to buy issuesof lower quality. Whenthe credit cycle is in its expansion phase, the statistics new issuance make clear that investors are buying new issuesin greater amounts. But the acceptance of securities of lower quality

bit more subtle. Whilethere are credit ratings and covenants to lo at, it can take effort and inference to understand the significanceo these things. In feeding frenzies caused by excess availab funds, recognizing and resisting this trend seemsto be beyond th ability of the majority of market participants.This is one o reasons why the aftermath of an overly generous capital m includes losses, economic contraction, and a subsequent unwillingness to lend. The bottom line of all of the aboveis that generous credi usually are associated with elevated asset pricesand subsequent losses, while credit crunches produce bargain-basement pricesand great profit opportunities. (“Open and Shut”) ∾ The ultimate purpose of this book isn’t to help you understand cycle they’ve taken place,like the Global Financial Crisisas described at length. Rather it is to enable you to sense wherewe stand cycles in real time, and thus to take the appropriate action. The key to dealing with the credit cycle lies in recognizing that it its apex when thingshave been going well for a while, news has been risk aversion is low, and investors are eager.That makes it easy to raise money and causes buyers and investors to compete opportunity to provide it. The result is cheapfinancing, low credit stand weak deals, and the unwise extension of credit. Borrowers hold the when the credit window is wide open—not lenders or investors. The implications of all of this should be obvious: proceed with The exact opposite becomes true at the other extreme of the cre nadir is reached when developments are unpleasant, risk aversion is heightened, and investors are depressed. Under such circumstances, no wantsto provide capital, the credit market freezes up, and propo go begging. This puts the cards into the handsof providers of capit than the borrowers. Because borrowing is difficult and capital is generally unavaila who possess it and are willing to part with it can apply rigor insist on strong loan structures and protective covenants, and demand prospective returns. It’s thingslike these that provide the margin of required for superior investing. Whenthese boxescan be ticked, inves should swinginto an aggressive mode. Superior investing doesn’t come from buying high-qualityassets, bu buying when the deal is good, the price is low, the potential retur substantial, and the risk is limited. Theseconditions are much more the when the credit markets are in the less-euphoric, more-stringent part

cycle.The slammed-shut phase of the credit cycle probably does more to make bargains available than any other singlefactor.