X THE DISTRESSED DEBT CYCLE Few lenders and bond buyers are imprudent enough to advanc money that won’tbe repaid if conditions remain as they a sober times,they insist on a margin of safetysufficient to ensure interest and principal will be paid even if conditions for the d deteriorate. But when the credit market heats up—when the race to the botto causes avid lenders to finance less-deserving borrowers and a weaker debt structures—bondsare issued that lack that margin o safetyand won’tbe able to be serviced if thingsget a little w This is the unwise extension of credit. This process, as w Oaktree, “stacks the logs in the fireplace” for the next bonfire I was fortunate to partner with BruceKarshthree decades ago, an in 1988 we formed our first fund for distressed debt investing, whic believe was one of the very first from a mainstream financial instit took us into a highly specialized investment niche. Rather than companies that are doing well or have brightfutures, ou distressed debt investmentsare generally in companies that are doing so poorly that they’ve defaulted on their outstanding debt or are consi highly likely to do so: they’re either in bankruptcy or viewed To be clear, our typical company isn’t challenged operationally, just overloaded with debt; thus our mantra is “goodcompany, bad balance Normally investors buy debt securities or make loans because they ex to be paid interest periodicallyand have their principal repaid when matures. With distressed debt, however, the consensus is that these thing won’toccur: instead it is expected that the debt won’t“stay curre serviced.” So if interest and principal aren’texpected to be paid, distressed debt investor’s motivation? The answer is that debtholders who aren’tpaid as scheduled have a “creditor claim” against the debtor. In short—and to over-simpl company goes through bankruptcy, the old owners are wipedout and

creditors become the new owners. Each creditor receives his share value of the company—depending on the amount and seniority of holds—in some combination of cash, new debt and ownership of the company going forward. A distressed debt investor tries to figureout (a) what the bankrupt is worth(or will be worthat the time it emerges from bankruptcy that value will be divided among the company’s creditors and other and (c) how long this process will take. With correct answers to questions, he can determine what the annual returnwill be on a company’s debt if purchased at a given price. Getting our start in distressed debt investing in 1988 was extremel advantageous, as there were few competitors and the field was little know and little understood—two conditions that can help make for superior retur possible in any field. As a result, our funds have been able to average returnover the 29 years since. But, as with many things, the is of only limited significance. The funds we formed at less-t generally have yielded good returns, but the results on funds form right times have been superlative. In other words, the opportunities for top returns in distresse go. Giventhe subject matter of this book, what I’ll review here that makes the opportunities rise and fall. Unsurprisingly, the answ the fluctuations in the distressed debt cycle.What,in turn, causes those fluctuations? ∾ The opportunities to profit in distressed debt are highly cyclical determined by developments in other cycles. Thus they are illustrative workings of cycles and ripe for discussion here. In the beginning—in 1988, 1989 and early 1990—our funds benefitted from the often-ignored benefits of distressed debt investing, and our were good. But in the latter half of 1990, the market for sub-investm debt collapsed in the first of the three majorcrises Bruceand I have through together. In addition to creating the low purchase price our 1990 funds above-average gainers, this episode was highly educ it gave us our first glimpse of the process through whichsuper opportunities arise in distressed debt. The first of the two essential ingredients in their creation consists unwise extension of credit.” Giventhe discussion in the last chap should have an understanding of what I have in mind and how I’ll explain through the example of high yield bonds:

At the start, appropriately risk-averse investors apply stringent credit standards to the issuance of high yield bonds. The same healthy economic environment that facilitates bond issuan makes it easy for companies to service their existing debt defaults are scarce). Thus high yield bonds—with their generous interest coupons and damage from defaults—provide solid realized returns. Thosereturns convince investors that high yield bond investing is attracting increased capital to the market. Increased capital for investment translates into increased demand bonds. Since Wall Streetnever allows demand to go unmet, in increased bond issuance. The same condition that allows largeramounts of bondsto be strong investor demand—invariably also allows bondsof lesser creditworthiness to be issued. Few lenders and bond buyers are imprudent enough to advance won’tbe repaid if conditions remain as they are. And in sober insist on a margin of safetysufficient to ensure, as I said and principal will be paid even if conditions for the debtor deter But when the credit market heats up—when the race to the bottom avid lenders to finance less-deserving borrowers and accept weak structures—bondsare issued that lack that margin of safetyand won’ to be serviced if thingsget a little worse. This is the unwi credit. This process, as noted earlier, “stacks the logs in the next bonfire. But that’s only the first half the process. Even after the fuel for a has been assembled, there won’tbe a conflagration until the second arrives: an igniter. It usually comes in the form of a corporate profits to decline. This is often accompanied by a the slamming shut of the credit window—such that existing debt can’t refinanced and goes into default instead. And often conditions are exace by exogenous events that sap confidence and damage the economy financial markets. In 1990 these consisted of: the Gulf War, whichwas set off by the Iraqi invasion of Kuwa the bankruptcy of many of the prominent, highly levered buyou 1980s; and the imprisonment of Michael Milken (the principal investment behind high yield bonds) and the collapse of Drexel Burnh employer and the investment bank most closely associated with high yield bonds). With Drexel and Milken gone from the scene,

exchanges that had helped weakened companies avoid default were to effect. Whenthe igniter arrives, bondsthat shouldn’t have been issued—and perhaps even some that should have—begin to fail. A slower economy makes it harder for companies to With the credit market closed, refinancing can’t be accomplished, meaning defaults rise. Rising defaults damage investor psychology. Investors who were risk-tolerantwhen thingswere going well now become risk-averse. Advancing capital to financially distressed companies—which seeme like a good idea just a short time earlier—now goes out of Potential debt buyers back away,refusing to “catch a falling saying they’ll wait until the uncertainty has been resolved. Capital that is mobile flees from the market. Buyers becom sellers predominate. Selling of bondsincreases; bond pricescascade downward; funds that receive withdrawalsbecome forced sellers; and eventually bonds available for sale at any price. Theseare the conditions that give rise to the ability to effect ba purchases of distressed debt, and thus to opportunities for elevated Of course, the cycle doesn’t go in just one direction. Eventual economy begins to recover and the credit market reopens. Thes developments cause the default rate on high yield bondsto recede. combination of an improving economy and a declining default selling to abate.Thus the downward pressure on bond priceseases,and buying begins. Pricesrise ratherthan fall, and balance sheet restructurin restore companies to viability, remove stumbling blocks and unloc Whengains on bond purchases made at the bottom begin to be notic additional capital is attracted to the market. The combination and increased capital causes the demand for bondsto grow. And we’vegone full cycle:we’re back to the beginning. A while back I put together a concise synopsis of the wa issuance underlays the rise and fall of the distressed debt cycle.Here Risk-averse investors limit quantities issued and demand high quality High-quality issuance leads to low default rates. Low default rates cause investors to become complacent and risktolerant.

Risk tolerance opensinvestors to increased issuance and lower quality Lower-quality issuance eventually is testedby economic difficulty gives rise to increased defaults. Increased defaults have a chilling effect, making investors once more. And so it resumes. This is a cycle I’ve seen in actionrepeatedly. My 29 years of ex distressed debt tells me its themes definitely do rhyme. And the description of the cycle gives me an excellent opportunity to make my that each event in a cycle causes the one that follows. In fact, description specifically to achieve that goal. Take a look at the progr just described: you’llsee that the final wordsof each line are the same first wordsof the line that follows. This is a true chain reaction, expect to continue in the future. ∾ As you can see, the rise and fall of opportunities in the mark debt stems from the interaction of other cycles: in the economy, inves psychology,risk attitudes and the credit market. The economic cycle influences investor psychology,company profitabilityand the incidence of default. The cycle in psychology contributes to fluctuations in credit market conditions and the desireof investors to lend, buy and sell. The cycle in attitudes toward risk facilitates the issuance of at the top and denies capital for refinancing at the bottom The credit cycle has a profound effect on the availability of refina and the degree to whichwould-be debt issuers are subjected credit standards. Hopefully it’s clear that multiple underlying cycles have effects on distressed debt market that are far from discrete and isolated. As earlier, each of these cycles rises and falls; each causes the other fall; and each is affected by the rise and fall of others. But this is a dramatic cycle in distressed debt opportunities, and one to explanation.