XI THE REAL ESTATE CYCLE Muchof investing is subject to gross generalizations and sweepin statements—usually stressing the positives, because of humans’ tendency toward greed and wishful thinking—and for some reason this seemsparticularly true in real estate. Over the course of m careerI’ve heard investment in real estate rationalized by easily digested statements like “they’re not making any more” (in connection with land), “you can always live in it” (in connection w houses), and “it’s a hedgeagainst inflation” (in connection with properties of all types). What people eventually learn is that regardless of the merit behind these statements, they won’tprotect a investment that was made at too high a price. The cycle in real estate has a lot in common with other cycles one that controls the provision of capital or credit. Positive events and increased profitabilitylead to greater enthus optimism. Improved psychology encourages increased activity. That includes doing more of something; doing it on the basis of rosier assumptions; higher pricesto do it; and/or lowering the standards that if one is to do it. All of these thingstend to entail the greater risk. The combination of positive psychology and the increase in causes asset pricesto rise, whichencourages still more activity, furthe price increases, and greater risk-bearing. Inevitably this virtuous circle takes on the appearance of being unstoppable, and this appearance causes asset pricesand the level activity to go too far to be sustained. But when the news eventually turns less positive and the environment becomes less hospitable, the levelsof psychology,activity and risk-bearin prove to have been excessive, and the same goes for asset prices. The

resulting price correction causes psychology to become less positive, causes disinvestment, whichputs further downward pressure on price forth. Theseare all elements that most financial cycles have in common includes the cycle in real estate. But the real estate cycle incorporate ingredient that the othersgenerally don’t share:the long lead times required for real estate development to take place. In the credit market, for instance, good news and rosy psychology wi to increased lending as soon as investment bankers can line up borrowers and print prospectuses. Thus lenders’ increased ardor translates almost instantaneously into increased demand for securities, lower dema yields, lower lending standards, and increased levelsof lending and issuance. But in the market for physical real estate—the worldof so-called and mortar”—there can be significant delays. Before a new build come to market, adding to the supply of space (and thus puttin pressure on pricesfor space if demand does not increase apace), feasibility studies have to be performed; a site has be foundand the building has to be designed; environmental impact studies performed; permission to build has to be secured from authorities, and sometimes zoning modifications; financing has to be obtained; and construction has to be completed. This process can run to sever the case of a majorproject it can exceed a decade. But change very significantly in the interim. I’ll use a description of the cycle in real estate development fro (January 2013)to illustrate. As I said there, “it’s usually clear, simp regularly recurring”: Bad times cause both the level of building activity to be low the availability of capital for building to be constrained. In a while the times become less bad, and eventually even go Bettereconomic times cause the demand for premises to rise. With few buildings having been started during the soft pe and now coming on stream, this additional demand for sp causes the supply/demand picture to tighten and thus ren sale pricesto rise. This improves the economics of real estate ownership, reawakening developers’ eagerness to build. The better times and improved economics also make providers of capital more optimistic. Their improved state of mind causes financing to become more readily available.

Cheaper, easierfinancing raises the pro formareturns on potential projects, adding to their attractiveness and increasin developers’ desireto pursue them. Higher projected returns, more-optimistic developers and moregenerous providers of capital combine for a ramp-up in starts. The first completed projects encounter strong pent-up demand. They lease up or sell out quickly, giving their developers go returns. Thosegood returns—plus each day’s increasinglypositive headlines—cause still more buildings to be planned, financed and green-lighted. Cranes fill the sky (and additional cranes are ordered fro factory, but that’s a different cycle). It takes years for the buildings started later to reach completi In the interim, the first ones to open eat into the unmet The period between the start of planning and the opening building is often long enough for the economy to transitio boom to bust. Projects started in good times often open in ba times,meaning their space adds to vacancies, putting downward pressure on rents and sale prices. Unfilled space hangsover th market. Bad times cause the level of building activity to be low an availability of capital for building to be constrained. Note that as in the case of many of the other cycles discusse step leads to the next. In particular, the step at the bottom of the one that kicks off the next iteration. This is a good example whichcycles are self-perpetuating. ∾ In lending, since the time lags inherent in the process are brief and business conditions in force at the time that the will to lend loan is conceived generally are still in force when the loan is funde conditions change materially in the relatively brief interim, the lende able to pull his commitment under a “material adverse change” the contract. Thus there’s relatively little risk in general lending from the gap between idea and action. But given the many years that can pass between a building’s concepti and its opening, conditions can change enormously, as just descr adds an element to real estate development that makes it poten Developers hope this risk will be offset by the fact that they can utiliz

extensive external financing (and thus they risk relatively little of their money and are able to lever up the returnon it to a great WhenI moved to Los Angeles in 1980, steel skeletons stood alo “Wilshire corridor” in Westwood, wheregleaming condominium buildings had been imagined. The developers who had initiated these projects in 1970sboom were caught out. The positive conditions that had supported initiation of those projects had turned negative, as the economy and as supply created by quicker builders sopped up what Some of those rusting skeletons remained uncompleted for years.Th developer who had dreamed of a high returnon a project’s $100 cost instead lost his $5 million or $10 million of equity good part of the construction loans they had extended for those proje illustrates the downside of the real estate cycle and the effect of the time lags. But investors who bought those haltedprojects (oftenfrom lenders tha repossessed them)and completed them often benefitted from: the ability to buy them for less than the developers had invest planning, entitling and construction of the framework, the reduced cost to complete them at lower pricesfor labor and in a non-boom environment, the shorter period remaining between the onset of their involv the completion of the building, and the possibility that—just as they had been approved in good times run into bad times—stalled projects purchased in bad times might onto the market in good times. The long lead time in real estate development gave rise to this po and my team participated in it. It illustrates the impact of cycle potential. Initiating projects in boom times can be a source of them in weak times can be very profitable. It all depends on what when you do it. Or as they say in golf, “Every putt makes ∾ There’s another aspect of cycles that can be seen clearly arena—although it affects cycles in many other areas as well—and fact that people’s decisions often fail to take into account what other doing. Here’s an example: Whenprosperity is rolling along and wealth and good feelings are there generally will be increases in the demand for homes—resulting increases in the price of homes—and increases in the availability financing to home buyers. Often this causes a housing shortage

demand for homes increases relative to supply, whichadjusts home pricescombine with eager lenders’ financing of homebuilders to encourage the construction of new homes to meet the demand. A homebuilder mightconclude there is unmet demand for 10 town. Out of an abundance of caution—and because of the limit and his access to funds—he decides to build just 20 new home good. But what if ten homebuilders all make the same decision? In tha homes will be built. First, more homes will be built than there’s And second, by the time those homes come on the market, the have cooled; people may not feel as prosperous; and thus demand mightbe sharply lower. In that case, the 200 new homes may dearth of demand, meaning they’ll go unsold or sell for on whichthe developers had based their decision to build. Now conditions have reversed. The economy is slow. Access to fin dries up, making it hard for would-be home buyers to obtain there’s a sizable inventory of unsold homes. Clearly the builders to stop building. So they all do so at the same time next time the economy improves, there may not be enough homes increase in demand. And so forth. This is a straightforward description of one aspect of a cy it isn’t hypothetical. At the 2012 Oaktree Conference,my partner showed one of the most compelling graphs I’ve ever seen: This graph presents the record of annual housing starts in the 1940 through 2010. The reason it made such an impression on me whereas it showed that 2010 housing starts were at the lowest wartime 1945 (and just equal to 1940’s slightly less-depressed level observation tells only part of the story. It fails to take into account since the ’40s in the U.S. population, the source from whichlong-run increases in demand for housing arise.

Thus, while the number of starts in 2010 was the same as in 19 of starts to population—arguably a far more meaningful figure—was half the highly depressed 1940 level. The explanation is that practically one had resumed building homes following the sub-prime mortgage housing bust, and Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08. The key infer draw from this observation was that the supply of new homes in immediately following clearly would be insufficient to meet a demand for homes. Of course, “conventional wisdom” at the time held that there co be a pickup in demand for homes. Instead, most people the American dream of home ownership was over; demand for home remain depressed forever; and thus the overhang of unsold home absorbed only very slowly. They cited the trend among young peop having been burnt by the collapse of the housing and mortgage rent ratherthan buy, and as usual they extrapolated it ratherthan quest durability. As in so many of the examples in this book, for most psychology-driven extrapolation took the place of an understanding belief in cyclicality. It was clear to me and my Oaktree colleagues, from the graph an knowledge of the data behind it, that because the greatest econ almost eighty years had haltedadditions to the housing supply, could recover strongly if there was any material increase in dema rejecting conventional wisdom, we were convinced that housing dema would prove cyclical as usual,and thus would pick up sometime intermediate-term future. This conclusion—supported by other data and analysis—contributed to our decision to investheavily in non-perform home mortgages and non-performing bank loans secured by land for residential construction, and to purchase NorthAmerica’s largest priva

homebuilding company. Theseinvestmentsworked out quite well. (It’s interesting in this context to note what the Wall StreetJournal said 12, 2017 article headlined “Generationof Renters Now Buying”: “In time home buyers] have accounted for 42% of buyers this year, up in 2015 and 31% at the lowest point during the recenthousing So much for extrapolating widespread abandonment of home ownership. This is an example of a case whereawareness of the nature our position in the current one permitted a profitable inference. case wherea cycle standing at an extreme—this time housing starts trough—sent a signalcalling for a highly profitable action. The proper course seemsclear now, when we look back on the ev The reasons behind successful decisions invariably are obvious in But in this case, dispassionate analysis of cyclical data permitted conclusion to be reached in real time . . . whichis when ∾ WhileI’m on the subject of cycles in real estate, I want time but not the last—on the way people occasionally conclude financial phenomenon has ceased being cyclical, and to that end, one of the greatest cases.Whenthingsgo well, people tend to think times will roll on forever. In fact, not much time has to have elaps last correction before cyclical history is overlooked in its entire appropriate to again cite John Kenneth Galbraith’s observation regarding attitudes toward history: Therecan be few fields of human endeavor in whichhistory c for so little as in the worldof finance. Past experience, to th that it is part of memory at all, is dismissed as the p those who do not have the insight to appreciate the incredible w of the present. Muchof investing is subject to gross generalizations and sweeping statements—usually stressing the positives, because of humans’ tende toward greed and wishful thinking—and for some reason this seem particularly true in real estate. Over the course of my careerI’ve investment in real estate rationalized by easilydigested statements like “they’re not making any more” (in connection with land), “you can live in it” (in connection with houses), and “it’s a hedgeagainst connection with properties of all types). What people eventually learn regardless of the merit behind these statements, they won’tprotect an investment that was made at too high a price.

In the late 1990sand early 2000s, as I mentioned earlier, a elected officials decided that as a step toward benefitting socie increasing access to the American dream, it would be swell owned homes. As a result, government-sponsored mortgage lende message that home financing should be made more easilyavailable, and complied. The combination of this message, the resulting increase mortgage availability, and the sharp decline in interest rates that was place at the time had a powerful stimulative effect on potential home The flow of money for mortgages was strongly encouraged by an estate platitude: “mortgage lending is safe.” This was based on conviction a nationwide wave of mortgage defaults couldn’t happen. The comb strong economic growth, generally moderate economic fluctuations, prudent mortgage lending practices had prevented the occurrence of wave in the period since the Great Depression . . . long enou such episode to be forgotten, as Galbraith says. But that didn’tmean were incapable of lapsing into lending practices so generous and that a powerful recession could bring on such a wave of defaults. In the early years of the 21st century, the combination of str homes and plentiful mortgage money—abetted by optimistic mediacove —caused home pricesto rise strongly. Thus we started to hear yet sweeping generalization concerning real estate: “home pricesalways (see the section that follows). I hope by now you’ve caught on to the fact that the me question matter only so much, and certainly they can’t be stron always carry the day. Human emotion inevitably causes the price even worthwhile assets—to be transported to levelsthat are extreme and unsustainable: either vertiginous highs or overly pessimistic lows. In short, conscientious belief in the inevitabilityof cycles like I’m means that a number of wordsand phrases must be excluded intelligent investor’s vocabulary. Theseinclude “never,” “always,” “forever,” “can’t,” “won’t,” “will”and “has to.” ∾ In the years leading up to the sub-prime mortgage crisis of 2007 Financial Crisisof 2007–08, a great deal of bullish behavior (whic shown to have been reckless) was underlaid by the belief that home depended on to appreciate steadily and not prove cyclical. As part contributingto—the bullish trend, some researchers rendered supportive statements and optimistic projections: According to a New York TimesMagazine article from March titled “This Very, Very Old House,” a vice president of the Federa

Reserve Bank of New York had concluded that “the sharp rise in pricesis in line with economic conditions . . . not a reality.” It even quoted him as saying, “We sometimes wonde home priceshaven’t increased much more, given the tremendous increase in the size of mortgage the average family can The article also mentioned “like-minded experts [from Columbia University and the Wharton School] who focus on what they call ‘superstar cities,’ places so desirable that they not only are for a correction but they also can sustain ‘ever-increasing’ prices compared with less-sought-after cities.” (Of course, willingness to employ terms like “ever-increasing” should serve as an absolute for the alert investor.) But there was a lot to question regarding the reasonableness of conclusions: the brevity of the data on home prices, the fact that statements made about the trend in the price of the home sold in a given year don’t necessarily say anything about the performance of a given home or of all homes standing adjustment for physical changes in the average houseover time, mix of homes sold that year relative to all homes), and likewise, there is no adjustment for the fact that neighborhoods wholecities go in and out of favor over time, affecting the value homes. For this reason, statements about homes in a given neighborhood wouldn’t necessarily be applicable to homes in Thus I foundit very interesting when “This Very, Very Old House” wa published in 2006. It reported on a study that solved many of methodological problems by following the price of a singlehousein Amsterdam: one that PieterFransz built in 1625. It had stood since virtually unaltered, and had changed handssix times,but its location Herengracht canal neighborhood had remained Amsterdam’s most desir throughout. Thus the article provided insight not as to whether average home had risen, but how the price of a particular home had performed. In contrast to the long-term optimists on housing quoted ea Robert Shiller said of the Fransz houseand its neighbors, “Loo Herengracht data is very instructive, because you can see 50-year growth, then it turns around. That’s more realistic than the super argument.” The author of the study,Piet Eichholtz, was described as “skeptical of those who claim that property values can continue to

infinitum.” He considered the economic arguments for it being “different time” but said, “you can see similarly rosy assessmentsmade over and over, whichare then quashed by circumstances.” Amen. Here’s more from the Timesarticle: “There is a myth whichsays that real-estate values go up s over time, . . .” Eichholtz said, “. . . but the data e that myth.” That is to say, whereeveryone from your wise old uncle to the broker who sold you your households it as gospel that real e one of the best long-term investments, this longest of long-te indices suggests that, on the contrary, it sort of stinks. B and 1973 (the period of Eichholtz’s original study), real propert values on the Herengracht—adjusted for inflation—went up a m 0.2 percent per year, worsethan the stingiest bank savings accoun As Shiller wrote in his analysis of the Herengracht index, pricesdid roughly double, but took nearly 350 years to do s . . . It’s only in recentyears,Shiller says, that huge incre real-estate priceshave become the norm and that people have come to expect them. . . . if this description of the past few years [in whic went up amazingly”] typifies the brave new worldwe live in, p it into the perspective of time—rise, fall, rise, fall—leads us back to what may be the oldesthistory lesson of all: it tends to r [emphasis added] The long-term data on home pricesis valuable, but the most importan lesson is that, in times of rising asset prices, people turn bullis commentators provide authoritative support. That’s only natural. rationalization for price appreciation that has taken place (and prediction still more to come) invariably occurs at highs,not lows. For real to commentators who issue sober statements in bullish times,or who against negativity when markets are down. ∾ The real estate industry is subject to cyclical ups and downs But real estate cycles can be amplified by special factors: the time lags between conception and readiness for sale, the extremely high financial leverage that is typical, and the fact that the supply is generally too inflexible to be demand fluctuates. (That is, a manufacturer can eliminate a

lay off workers or reduce production if demand for his But a landlord, hotelier or real estate developer has a much reducing the premises he has on offer if demand falls short.) The cycle in real estate illustrates and exemplifies the ways in which cyclical factors lead to and cause each other, as well as the tende to go to extremes. It’s not for nothing that they often say cynic tougher times,when optimistic generalizations can no longer be summ forth—that “only the third owner makes money.” Not the developer conceived and initiated the project. And not the banker who loane for its construction and then repossessed the project from the deve down-cycle.But ratherthe investor who bought the property from the amid distress and then rode the up-cycle. Of course this is an exaggeration, like all generalizations. Bu as a reminder of the relevance of cyclicality to the real estate especially of the way cyclicality can function in the less-good times