XII PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER—THE MARKET CYCLE The first time an inexperienced investor lives through an upward market cycle,the beginnings of the progression may seem logical, a the positives compound in a bull market or bubble. The f much good news and good feeling can end in lossescan come as a surprise. It is inescapable that it will seem so to the uninitia course, because if the progressions weren’t permitted to g extremes on the basis of errorsin judgment, markets wouldn’t r bull market tops to collapse from (or bear market bottoms to from). Our job as investors is simple: to deal with the pricesof wherethey stand today and making judgments regarding how they will change in the future. Pricesare affected primarily by developme areas:fundamentals and psychology. Fundamentals, whichI’ve been calling “events,” can largely be to earnings, cash flow, and the outlook for the two. They are many things, including trendsin the economy, profitabilityand the availability of capital. And psychology—howinvestors feel about fundamentals and value them—is likewise affected by many things, particularly investors’ of optimism and attitude toward risk. Thereare cycles in the elements mentioned above, and several each cycle.The themes behind the cycles’ behavior—and the ways they interact and combine—have a repeating, understandable pattern, have discussed at length. They all come together—and they combine idiosyncratic and random influences—to cause the behavior of the market.

It’s my goal in this chapter to give you a feel for the cy downs of the market. Not for the fact that it rises and falls, so in the past, or what these movements were in reaction to. But forces—andspecifically the non-fundamental, non-economic forces—that cause it to go up and down, often in manicfashion. If the market were a disciplined calculator of value based exclusiv company fundamentals, the price of a security wouldn’t fluctuate than the issuer’s current earnings and the outlook for earnings fact, the price generally should fluctuate less than earnings, since quart quarter changes in earnings often even out in the long run and, necessarily reflect actualchanges in the company’s long-term potential. And yet security pricesgenerally fluctuate much more than earnings. Th reasons, of course, are largely psychological, emotional and non-f Thus price changes exaggerate and overstate fundamental changes. Here shorthand version as to why: Events in the economy and in corporate profits turn increa positive. Positive events feed investor psychology.Emotion, so-called “anim spirits” and investors’ tolerance for risk all rise with those positiv events (or sometimes despite negative ones). Rising psychology causes investors to be less demanding in protection and prospective return. The combination of positive events, strengthening psychology lowering of investors’ returnrequirements causes asset pricesto Eventually, however, the process goes into reverse. Events fail to expectations, perhaps because the environment that produ becomes less hospitable, or perhaps because expectations were unrealistically high. Investors eventually prove that psychology can’t remain positive foreve Cooler heads conclude that priceshave reached levelsthat are unjustified, or psychology may softenfor any of a million possib reasons (or for no apparent reason). Pricesfall when events are less positive or come to be viewe positively. Sometimes it happens simply because priceshave reache levelsthat are unstainable,or because of negative developments environment. Having turned downward, asset pricescontinue to decline until so low that the stage is set for their recovery. It’s important to understand the way fundamentals and psychology int as described above. But it’s essential that I repeatsomething abou

process: while the description aboveis of one that is orderly and the process is nowhere as neat as this description may make it sequence in whichthese thingsoccur is subject to change, as is direction of causality. Sometimes events cause psychology to strengthen, and sometimes improving psychology has a positive impact on events (for bolstering the economy and corporate profits). And while it’s obvious that improved investor psychology makes pricesrise, it’s just as obvious that rising pricesmake investors feel wealthier, smarter and more optimistic. So, in other words, these relationships can work in both direction even do so simultaneously. And each can cause the other. The speed at thingsplay out is highly variable from cycle to cycle and over the given cycle.And lastly,cycles don’t necessarily progress smoothly; rather, they can be marked by dips, recoveries and feints along the way. It’s for reasons like these that investing can’t be described as sci can’t be depended on to work the same every time. I keep coming Mark Twain’s observation that “history doesn’t repeatitself, but it does rhyme.” The reasons and results are never the same as in the usually reminiscent of developments we’veseen before. Regardless of the imprecision of the process, it’s clear that past ev expected futureevents combine with psychology to determine asset price Events and psychology also influence the availability of credit, and availability of credit greatly affects asset prices, just as it feeds influence events and psychology. In sum, these thingsall come together to createthe market cycle.W about it every day, most prominentlyin connection with the ups and down the stock market, but also with regard to markets for thingslike and currencies. This is wheremany cycles intersect, and it’s the subje chapter. ∾ Financial theory portrays investors as “economic men”:objective, ration optimizers. Thus it suggests that the market they collectively form is author and investor (and Warren Buffett’s teacher) Ben Graham “weighing machine”: a disciplined assessor of the value of assets. In stark contrast, however, the truth is that financial facts and fig only a starting point for market behavior; investor rationality is not the rule; and the market spends little of its time calmly data and setting pricesfree of emotionality.

Investment fundamentals are ratherstraightforward. Past events have already taken place and been recorded, and many people have the quan skills required to analyze them. Current performance is captured statements, whichsometimes present an accurate picture and sometimes require skillful adjustment. And futureevents are unknown to every (although some investors are better able than othersto foresee them). Fundamentals aren’tthe most variable part of investing or the part intrigues me most. And anyway, I can’t write a book telling you more than othersabout futureevents. Doing a superior job of that elements of foresight, intuition and “second-level thinking” that I be reduced to paper or taught. The part of investing that fascinates me—that I find myself thi most, and wheremy Oaktree colleagues and I have made some of our contributions to our clients’ welfare—regards the ways in whichinves deviate from the assumption of rationality, and the contributionof those to the oscillation of cycles. A large number of elements play parts in this aspect of inv making, interfering with the process of arriving at purely econ They may come under the headings of human nature, psychology or —the distinction isn’t straightforward or important for our purposes here— and they absolutely are capable of dominating investor behavior and markets. Some but not all vary cyclically, and they all can affect or cycles. Here are the most important influences: the way investors fluctuate ratherthan hold firmly to rational and the resulting rational decisions; the tendency of investors to hold distorted viewsof what’s engaging in selective perception and skewed interpretation; quirks like confirmation bias, whichmakes people accept confirms their thesis and reject that whichdoesn’t, and the tendency toward non-linear utility, whichcauses most people to value more highly than a dollarmade (or a dollarof potential profit the gullibility that makes investors swallow tall tales of profit good times,and the excessive skepticism that makes them reject all possibility of gains in bad times; the fluctuating nature of investors’ risk tolerance and risk aversi thus of their demands for compensatory risk premiums; the herd behavior that results from pressure to fall into line othersare doing, and as a result the difficulty of holding positions; the extreme discomfort that comes from watching othersmake money doing something you’ve rejected;

thus the tendency of investors who have resisted an asset bubble ultimately succumb to the pressure, throwin the towel and buy though—no, because—the asset that is the subject of the appreciated substantially); the corresponding tendency to give up on investmentsthat are and unsuccessful, no matter how intellectually sound, and finally, the fact that investing is all about money, whichintrod powerful elements such as greed for more, envy of the money making, and fear of loss. Bulls and Bears Investors have been characterized for at least a hundred years as (optimists who think stocks will rise and behave aggressively as “bears” (pessimists who think they’ll fall and who thus behave defen Consequently, people apply the label of “bull market” to a mark risen, is rising or will rise (it’s quite imprecise) and “bear market” to opposite. About 45 years ago—in the early 1970s—I received one of the gifts I was ever given, when an older and wiser investor introduced three stagesof a bull market”: the first stage, when only a few unusually perceptive people believ thingswill get better, the second stage, when most investors realize that improvement actually taking place,and the third stage, when everyone concludes thingswill get better forever. The arrival of this simple truth opened my eyes to the no psychological extremes and the impact of those extremes on mark Like many of the great quotations and adages, it captures disproporti wisdom in a few simple words. It’s all about the changeabil pattern they follow over the course of a cycle,and how they error. In the first stage, because the possibility of improvement is inv most investors and thus unappreciated, security pricesincorporate little or optimism. Often the first stage occurs after priceshave been pounded in crash,and the same downtrend that decimated pricesalso has wipedout psychology,turning the members of the crowd against the mark them to swearoff investing forever.

In the last stage, on the other hand, events have gone well for so have been reflected so powerfully in asset prices, further liftingthe the market—that investors extrapolate improvement to infinity and pricesto reflect their optimism. Trees generally don’t grow to the sky, this stage investors act as if they will . . . and pay up they perceive. Few thingsare as costlyas paying for potential that have been overrated. It follows from the abovethat someone who invests in the fir when almost no one can see a reason for optimism—buys asset pricesfrom whichsubstantial appreciation is possible. But someone who in the third stage invariably pays a high price for the market’s exces enthusiasm and loses money as a result. The description of the three stagesof the bull market offersa lot with great economy. But not long after learning about the three stages, across something even better and briefer—essentially the same message just 14 words: “What the wise man does in the beginning, the end.” I consider this the number-onepiece of investment wisdom and an incredible distillation of the import of cycles. Again, the early who by definition has to be that rare person who sees the futur othersand has the inner strength to buy without validation from the garners undiscovered potential at a bargain price. But every inves eventually is overdone and bid up too far, so that the buyer in for potential that is overrated. He ends up with capital punishmen appreciation. “What the wise man does in the beginning, the fool does in the you 80% of what you have to know about market cycles and their Warren Buffett has said much the same thing even more concisely: “Firs innovator, then the imitator, then the idiot.” Of course, cycles work in both directions, and the depths of Financial Crisisgave me an opportunity to invertthe old saying and the three stagesof a bear market in “The Tide Goes Out” (March the first stage, when just a few thoughtful investors recognize that, despite the prevailing bullishness, thingswon’talways be rosy, the second stage, when most investors recognize that thingsare deteriorating, and the third stage, when everyone’s convinced thingscan only get worse. I’ve mentioned capitulation before. It’s a fascinating phenomenon, an there’s a dependable cycle to it, too. In the first stage of eithe market, most investors refrain (by definition) from joining in on

only a tiny minority does. This may be because they lack the speci that underlies that action; the ability to act before the case and othershave flocked to it (after whichit’s no longer unapprecia reflected in market prices); or the spine needed to take a the herd and behave as a non-conforming contrarian. Having missed the opportunity to be early, bold and right, investors continue to resist as the movement takes hold and gathers steam. has resulted in market movement, they still may not join in. With discipline, they refuseto buy into the market, asset class or industry that has been lifted by bullish buyers, or to sell once selling caused pricesto fall belowintrinsic value.It’s not for them to join late. But most investors do capitulate eventually. They simply run out of resolve needed to hold out. Once the asset has doubled or triple the way up—or halved on the way down—many people feel wrong, and are so envious of those who’ve profited from the stepped the decline, that they lose the will to resist further. My on this subject is from Charles Kindleberger: “There is nothi to one’s well-being and judgment as to see a friendget rich” (Man and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, 1989). Market pained by the money that othershave made and they’ve missed they’re afraidthe trend (and the pain) will continue further. They conc that joining the herd will stop the pain, so they surrender. Eventually the asset well into its rise or sell after it has fallen a great deal. In other words, after failing to do the right thing in stage on compound the error by taking that actionin stage three, when it has the wrong thing to do. That’s capitulation. It’s a highly investor behavior during cycles, and a great example of psych error at its worst. Of course, when the last resister has given up and bought we —or sold well into the decline—there’s no one left to fall in line. buyers means the end of the bull market, and vice versa.The makes the top or bottom and sets the scene for a cyclical direction. He is the “fool in the end.” The following account from history shows that even the most bri among us can fall prey to capitulation: Sir Isaac Newton, who was the Master of the Mint at the ti “South Sea Bubble,” joined many other wealthy Englishmenin investing in the stock [of the SouthSea Company]. It rose from £ in January of 1720 to £1,050 in June. Early in this rise, h Newton realized the speculative nature of the boom and sold h

£7,000 worthof stock.Whenasked about the direction of the market he is reported to have replied “I can calculate the motion heavenly bodies, but not the madness of the people.” By September 1720, the bubble was punctured and the stock price fell below£200, off 80% from its high three months earlier. It tu out, however, that despite having seen through the bubble e Isaac, like so many investors over the years,couldn’t stand the pressure of seeing those around him make vast profits. He b back the stock at its high and endedup losing£20,000. Not even o of the world’s smartest men was immune to this tangible le gravity! (“bubble.com,” January 2000) Bubbles and Crashes We’ve always had rising and falling markets, and we always continue to a significant extent, they’re calledbull markets and Even further and they’re calledbooms, manias and crazes; busts panics. The most popular terms today for describing extreme bull and markets are “bubble” and “crash.” Theselatter terms have been around for a long time. The “South Se Bubble” cited above, a maniafor investing in the company that would pay off the national debt by exploiting a monopoly to America, caught England by storm in 1720. And the market colla kicked off the Great Depression is calledthe Great Crashof 1929. But the “tech bubble,” “Internet bubble” and “dot-com bubble” of 1995 and the housing and mortgage bubbles that endedin 2007, bringing significant crashes in markets around the world—thatbrought the “bubble” into everyday use. As a result of the foregoing, there’s a tendency these days—es the part of the media—to call any big market rise a bubble. in fall 2017, the S&P 500 index of U.S. stocks has roughly quad (including dividends) from its low in March 2009, and the yield on yield bondshas fallen to a piddling 5.8%.Thus I’m often asked whether we’re in a new bubble of one kind or another, perhaps imply imminent. That’s why I want to spendsome time on my conviction every big rise is a bubble. For me, the term “bubble” has speci psychological connotations that should be understood and looked I’ve lived through bubbles much older than those in tech stocks an housing mentioned on the preceding page. One of the best examples 1960smaniafor the “Nifty Fifty”stocks—the shares of the highest-qua

fastest-growing companies in America. As far as I’m concerned, there common thread that runs through bubbles and was exemplifiedby Fifty: conviction that, as far as the subject asset is concerned, “ther thing as a price too high.” And of course it follows that you pay, you’re sure to make money. There’s only one form of intelligent investing, and that’s figuring ou something’sworthand buying it for that price or less. You can’t have intelligent investing in the absence of quantification of value and on an attractive purchase price. Any investment movement that’s built aroun a concept other than the relationship between price and value is irrati The idea of “growth stocks” beganto be popularized in the ea based on the goal of participating in the rapidly growing profi benefitting from advances in technology, marketing and management techniques. It gathered steam, and by 1968, when I had a summ investment research department of First National City Bank (the predecesso of Citibank), the Nifty Fifty stocks—the fastest growing and best—had appreciated so much that the bank trust departmentsthat did most of the investing in those days generally lost interest in all other stocks. Everyone wanted a piece of Xerox, IBM, Kodak, Polaroid, M Hewlett-Packard, TexasInstruments, Coca-Cola and Avon. Thesecompanies were considered to be so great that nothing bad could ever happen And it was accepted dictum that it absolutely didn’tmatter what paid. If it was a little too high, no matter: the companies’ fast-r would soon grow into it. The result was predictable. Whenever people are willing to invest regardless of price, they’re obviously doing so based on emotion and popularity ratherthan cold-blooded analysis. So Nifty Fifty stocks that been selling at 80–90 times earnings in 1968, in the vanguard bull market, came down to earth when ardor cooled. Thus many sold at times earnings in the much weaker stock market of 1973, meaning in “America’s best companies” had lost 80–90% of their money. And that several of the “flawless” companies mentioned have since gone bank or experiencedserious brushes with distress. So much for “no price too high.” No asset or company is so can’t become overpriced. Certainly that notion must have been banished forever. But lest you think this lesson truly was learned, let’s fast-forward 1990s. Now it was technology stocks that were commanding wide attention. Just as corporate innovation had sparked the growth stock gains in telecommunications (cell phones and transmission via optic media(including the limitless demand for “content” to fill the new

entertainment channels), and information technology (especially the Internet) were firing investors’ imaginations. “The Internet will change the world,” was the battle cry, followed by “for an e-commerce stock,there’s no price too high.” Whe Fifty stocks had sold at inflated multiples of their companies’ earni wasn’t a problem with Internet stocks: these companies had no only was the investing purely conceptual, but so were many of the So instead of p/e ratios, the stocks sold at multiples of any) or “eyeballs”: the number of consumers visiting their websites. Just as with the Nifty Fifty, there was a grain of truth underlying the investment fad; one is usually required in order for a bubble investors slipped the moorings of reason and discipline when they that price didn’tmatter. They were right; the Internet certainly did chan world, whichis unrecognizable today from what it was twenty years the companies behind the vast majority of the Internet stocks 2000 no longer exist. The Nifty Fifty lossesof 80–90% are enviable; companies’ investors lost 100%. The bottom line is clear: I think “pricedoesn’t matter” is a component—and a hallmark—of a bubble. Likewise, in bubbles, often conclude that you can make money by borrowing money to mania. No matter what the interest rate is on your loan, the appreciate at a rate abovethat. Clearly this is another example suspension of analytical disbelief. “No price too high” is the ultimate ingredient in a bubble, an foolproof sign of a market gone too far. Thereis no safe way a bubble, only danger. It should be noted, however, that from synonymous with “going down tomorrow.” Manyfads roll on well the time when they first reach bubble territory. Several prominent inves threw in the towel in early 2000 because their resistance to the tech had proved so painful. Some saw clients withdraw a large part some became dispirited and quit the business, and othersgave up and into the bubble . . . just in time to see it collapse, ∾ The following progression serves to sum up regarding the upswing market cycle.It shows how cycles in economics, profits, psych aversion and mediabehavior combine to move market priceswell beyo intrinsic value,and how one development contributes to the next. The economy is growing, and the economic reports are positiv Corporate earnings are rising and beating expectations. The mediacarry only good news.

Securities markets strengthen. Investors grow increasinglyconfident and optimistic. Risk is perceived as being scarce and benign. Investors think of risk-bearingas a sure route to profit. Greedmotivates behavior. Demand for investment opportunities exceeds supply. Asset pricesrise beyond intrinsic value. Capital markets are wide open, making it easy to raise money over debt. Defaults are few. Skepticism is low and faith is high, meaning risky deals can be No one can imagine thingsgoing wrong. No favorable developmen seemsimprobable. Everyone assumes thingswill get better forever. Investors ignore the possibility of loss and worryonly about missin opportunities, No one can think of a reason to sell, and no one is Buyers outnumber sellers. Investors would be happyto buy if the market dips. Pricesreach new highs. Media celebrate this exciting event. Investors become euphoric and carefree. Security holders marvel at their own intelligence; perhaps more. Thosewho’ve remained on the sidelines feel remorse; thus they capitulate and buy. Prospective returns are low (or negative). Risk is high. Investors should forgetabout missing opportunity and worryonly about losingmoney. This is the time for caution! The most important thing to note is that maximum psychology,maximum availability of credit, maximum price, minimum potential returnand maximum risk all are reached at the same time, and usually these coincide with the last paroxysm of buying. Likewise, the following progression outlines what happens in a ma downswing. The economy is slowing; reports are negative. Corporate earnings are flat or declining, and falling short of Media reportonly bad news.

Securities markets weaken. Investors become worried and depressed. Risk is seen as being everywhere. Investors see risk-bearingas nothing but a way to lose money Fear dominates investor psychology. Demand for securities falls short of supply. Asset pricesfall belowintrinsic value. Capital markets slam shut, making it hard to issue securities debt. Defaults soar. Skepticism is high and faith is low, meaning only safe deals can or maybe none at all. No one considers improvement possible. No outcome seemstoo to happen. Everyone assumes thingswill get worseforever. Investors ignore the possibility of missing opportunity and worry about losingmoney. No one can think of a reason to buy. Sellers outnumber buyers. “Don’t try to catch a falling knife” takes the place of Pricesreach new lows. The mediafixate on this depressing trend. Investors become depressed and panicked. Security holders feel dumb and disillusioned. They realize they really understand the reasons behind the investmentsthey made. Thosewho abstained from buying (or who sold) feel validated and celebrated for their brilliance. Thosewho held give up and sell at depressed prices, adding the downward spiral. Implied prospective returns are sky-high. Risk is low. Investors should forgetabout the risk of losingmoney and worry about missing opportunity. This is the time to be aggressive! In the reverse of the “top” that results from the upswing of cycle,now we see that the nadir of psychology,a total inability to credit, minimum price, maximum potential returnand minimum risk all coincide at the bottom, when the last optimist throws in the The progressions outlined here are simplistic. In fact, they can see cartoonish depictions of the road to failure. But they are not imag exaggerated. It is absolutely logical that each event will bring on

in both directions . . . until an illogical extreme is reach cards collapses. The events don’t always occur in the same order,and not all of necessarily present in every market cycle.But these behaviors are real, they certainly are elements that rhyme in the markets from decad The first time an inexperienced investor lives through an upward cycle,the beginnings of the progression may seem logical, as the posit compound in a bull market or bubble. The fact that so much good feeling can end in lossescan come as a surprise. It is will seem so to the uninitiated, of course, because if the progr permitted to go on to extremes on the basis of errorsin judgm wouldn’t reach bull market tops to collapse from (or bear market recover from). ∾ On pages 19–21, I discussed the relationship between wherewe stand cycles and what that implies for prospective returns. Now, to close chapter, I want to further illustrate that connection. In the last few weeks—while on the verge of submitting my fin this book—I hit upon a way to show the relationship I have in assume first that the market cycle is at its midpoint. That usual economic growth is on-trend, profits are normal, valuation metri reasonable in the context of history, asset pricesare in line with value,and emotions aren’textreme. Givenall the above, the outlook returns, too, is “normal,” meaning the probability distribution governing futurereturns looks like the one on page 19.

But what happens if the market is, instead, at a cyclical what’s going on in terms of fundamentals, that means valuations stretched, pricesfar exceed intrinsic value,and a high level of optim bakedin. At such a point, the outlook for returns is sub-par the negative, as shown by the new distribution below.

And how about at a cyclical low? Now, thanks to depressed inv psychology,valuation metrics are at historically low levelsthat suggest presence of bargains, and thus asset pricesare well belowintrinsic value Now the distribution regarding futurereturns is shifted well to the implying unusually high potential for profit.

This conceptual depiction indicates the relationship between cycle level and potential for return. It’s far from scientific, but everything I it’s right.