XIII HOW TO COPE WITH MARKET CYCLES What’s the key in all of this? To know wherethe pendulum o psychology and the cycle in valuation stand in their swings. To r to buy—and perhaps to sell—when too-positivepsychology and the willingness to assign too-high valuations cause pricesto soar to p levels. And to buy when downcast psychology and the desertion o valuation standards on the downside cause panicky investors to c bargains by selling, despite the low pricesthat result. The investor’s goal is to position capital so as to benefit developments. He wantsto have more invested when the market rises when it falls, and to own more of the thingsthat rise more or fall of the others. The objective is clear. The question is how to The first step is to decide how you will deal with the future. believe in economic and market forecasting, and in taking the such forecasts demand. Thus they investmore aggressively when forecasts call for favorable events, and vice versa. As I’ve made clear, I don’t believe in forecasting. Very few people know enough about what the futureholds for it to add to their retur record of most forecasters—in terms of both predicting events bette othersand having better investment performance than othersas a resul quite lackluster. A few people become famous in each period spectacular successes, but usually their next correct forecast doesn’t many years. In the absence of the ability to see the future, how ca portfolios for what lies ahead? I think much of the answer lies understanding wherethe market stands in its cycle and what that its futuremovements.As I wrote in The Most Important Thing, “we never know wherewe’re going, but we’d better have a good idea wherewe are.” To do that requires an understanding of the basic nature of general: what gives rise to their movements,what causes them to progr

toward peaks and troughs, and what causes them to retreat from extremes? We’ve touched on the key elements that concern us: the tendency of basic themes to repeatand of history to the tendency of thingsto rise and fall, especially those determined human nature, the way each development in a cycle has implications for the way the various cycles interact and influence each other, the role of psychology in pushing cyclical phenomena beyond levels, thus the tendency of cycles to go to extremes, their tendency to move from extremes back toward a midpoint, the regularity with whichthat movement continues past the midpoint, toward the opposite extreme. Theseare the generalities that affect cycles of all kinds.In addition, have to bear in mind the specific elements that influence the mark the economic and profit cycles that shape the investment environment the tendency of psychology to overreact to developments in environment, the way risk is considered non-existent and benign at some then enormous, inescapable and lethal at others, and the way market pricesreflect only positives and overstate them point, and then reflect only negatives and ignore all the positiv another. Theseare the fundamentals—the basicsregarding cycles in general specific ways they work in the markets—that we must perceive, atten obey. We must use the insights we garner to assesswherethe mark positioned, what that implies for its futuremovements,and what we shou do as a result. ∾ Equipped with a deep understanding of the above, we turn to figuring out wherewe stand in the cycle. What’s the key in all of this? To know wherethe pendulum of and the cycle in valuation stand in their swings. To refuseto buy— perhaps to sell—when too-positivepsychology and the willingness to assig too-high valuations cause pricesto soar to peak levels. And to buy downcast psychology and the desertion of valuation standards on the downside cause panicky investors to createbargains by selling despi

pricesthat prevail. As Sir John Templeton put it, “To buy when other despondently selling and sell when othersare greedily buying requi greatest fortitude and pays the greatest reward.” The upward movement of pricesfrom fair value to excess usually to the presence of some combination of important elements: generally good news, complacency regarding events, uniformly upbeat treatment by the media, the unquestioning acceptance of optimistic accounts, a decline in skepticism, a dearth of risk aversion, a wide-open credit market, and a positive general mood. Conversely,the collapse of pricesfrom fair value to bargain levelsis usually marked by some or all of the following: generally bad news, rising alarm regarding events, highly negative mediaaccounts, the wholesale acceptance of scare stories, a strong rise in skepticism, a significant increase in risk aversion, a credit market that has slammed shut, and a mood of general depression. The question is how we can tell wherethe market stands in Importantly, the elements that contribute to the market’s rise mani themselves via valuation metrics—p/e ratios on stocks, yieldson bond capitalization ratios on real estate, and cash flow multiples on buyo are elevated relative to historic norms. All of these thingsare low prospective returns. The reverse is true when a market colla asset pricesto bargain valuations. Thesethingscan be observed and quantified. In addition, our understanding of cycle positioning can be greatly an awareness of how investors are behaving. To respond to mark understand their message, one realization is more important than all other the risk in investing doesn’t come primarily from the economy, the companies, the securities, the stock certificates or the exchange buildings. comes from the behavior of the market participants.So do most opportunities for exceptional returns.

Wheninvestors act in a prudent manner, reflect risk aversion skepticism and restrain their positive emotions, security pricestend to reasonable relative to underlying value,making the market a safe place.On the other hand, when investors become euphoric, their overenthusiastic buying lifts pricesto dangerous levels. And when they’ despondent,their panicked selling takes pricesto bargain lows. Warren Buffett tells us, “The less prudence with whichothersconduct affairs, the greater the prudence with whichwe should conduct affairs.” Whenothersare euphoric, we should be terrified. And when are terrified, we should turn aggressive. It’s not what you buy that determines your results, it’s what you pa And what you pay—the security’s price and its relationship to intrinsic —is determined by investor psychology and the resulting behavior. The to being able to behave in a way that’s appropriate given the mark lies significantly in assessing psychology and the behavior of other have to know whether the market is red-hot and thus overpriced, thus a bargain. In “It Is What It Is” (March 2006)—andalso in The Most Im —I included what I calleda guide to market assessment. I can’t reason not to include it again here, or of a better substitute. these pointsare non-scientific, non-quantitative and non-quantifiable, and even somewhat jocular. But they should give you a sense for the watchout for: Economy: Vibrant Sluggish Outlook: Positive Negative Lenders: Eager Reticent Capital markets: Loose Tight Capital: Plentiful Scarce Terms: Easy Restrictive Interest rates: Low High Yield Spreads: Narrow Wide Investors: Optimistic Pessimistic Sanguine Distressed

Eager to buy Uninterested in buying Asset owners: Happy to hold Rushing for the exits Sellers: Few Many Markets: Crowded Starved for attention Funds: Hard to gain entry Open to anyone New ones daily Only the best can raise money GeneralPartnershold the cards on terms LimitedPartnershave bargaining power Recent performance: Strong Weak Asset prices: High Low Prospective returns: Low High Risk: High Low Popular qualities: Aggressiveness Cautionand discipline Broad reach Selectivity The right qualities: Cautionand discipline Aggressiveness Selectivity Broad reach Available mistakes: Buying too much Buying too little Paying up Walking away Taking too much risk Taking too little risk As I said in introducing the guide, “for each pair, checkoff the think is most descriptive of the current market. And if you find your checkmarksare in the left-hand column, hold on to your walle Thesesorts of markers can tell us wherewe stand in the cycle an that’s likely to implyfor the future. Thus they help in what I call temperatureof the market.” Here’s how I described the process Important Thing:

If we are alert and perceptive, we can gaugethe behavior of th around us and from that judge what we should do. The essential ingredient here is inference, one of my favorite words. Everyone sees what happens each day, as reported in th media. But how many people make an effort to understand what th everyday events say about the psyches of market participants,th investment climate, and thus what should be done in response? Simply put, we must strive to understand the implications of going on around us. Whenothersare recklessly confident and buying aggressively, we should be highly cautious; when othersare frightened into inaction or panicked selling, we should become aggressive. So look around, and ask yourself: Are investors optimistic or pessimistic?Do the mediatalking heads say the markets should b piled into or avoided? Are novel investment schemes readily accepte or dismissed out of hand?Are securities offerings and fund opening being treated as opportunities to get rich or possible pitfalls credit cycle rendered capital readily available or impossible to o Are price/earnings ratios high or low in the context of history yield spreads tight or generous? All of these factors are important, and yet none of them entai forecasting. We can make excellent investment decisions on the basis of present observations, with no need to make guesses about th future. The key is to take note of thingslike these and let them tell what to do. Whilethe markets don’t cry out for actionalong these lines every day, they do at the extremes, when their pronouncements are highly important. At any time, lots of thingsare happening in the world, the ec investment environment. No one can study,parse,understand and incorporate all of them into investment decisions. And no one need try. At any different events occur in each cycle,and in a different sequence, different results. My point here is that not all the details are important. Rather, (a) figureout whichare the important ones, (b) make inferences about what going on from the important ones (and then perhaps consider as many less-important ones as we can), and (c) conclude from those inferences are the one or two thingsthat most characterizethe investment environmen and what actionthey call for. In other words, being attuned to cycli developments and their significance.

In particular, however, you can’t have the extremes of market cy without a departure of valuation metrics from their norms. Valu result—and thus symptomatic or indicative—of investor psychology. The psychological and emotional elements I’ve listed have their primary impact by convincing investors that past valuation standards have beco irrelevant and can be departed from. Wheninvestors are flyinghigh and making money, they find it easy to come up with convenient reaso assetsshould be untethered from the constraints of valuation norms. explanation usually begins with, “it’s different this time.” Watch ominous sign of the willing suspension of disbelief. Likewise, when pricescollapse in a crash,it’s usually because of an assumption the thingsthat supported value in the past can be trusted to work So the key to understanding wherewe stand in the cycle depends formsof assessment: The first is totally quantitative: gauging valuations. This is appropriate starting point, for if valuations aren’tout of line with the market cycle is unlikely to be highly extended in And the second is essentially qualitative: awareness of what’s around us, and in particular of investor behavior. Importantly, possible to be disciplined even in observing these largely nonquantitative phenomena. The key questions can be boiled down to two: how are thingspri how are investors around us behaving? Assessing these two elements— consistentlyand in a disciplined manner—can be very helpful. The will give us a sense for wherewe stand in the cycle. In closing on this subject, I want to repeatsomething I’ve be even the best of temperature-taking can’t tell us will happen next tendencies. Since market cycles vary from one to the next in terms of the pace and duration of their fluctuations, they’re not regular enou us to be sure what’ll happen next on the basis of what has from a given point in the cycle,the market is capable of movi direction: up, flat or down.

But that doesn’t mean all three are equally likely. Where we influences the tendencies or probabilities, even if it does not deter developments with certainty. All other thingsbeing equal,when the market high in its cycle,a downward correction is more likely than continued and vice versa.It doesn’t have to work out that way, of course, safer bet. Assessing our cycle position doesn’t tell us what will happ just what’s more and less likely. But that’s a lot. ∾ The best way to teach the recognition of cyclical excesses is throu examples of how it can be done at the extremes, whereit matte over the following pages I’m going to review the formation of two bubbles and the crash that followed the second of them. Even the were different, but each of these three market events illustrates the of assessing the market’s temperature. First, let’s review the meteoric rise of stocks in the late 19 2000, and especially the formation of the Internet bubble. What shou alert investor have noted during that time? In the decade of the 1990s, the U.S. economy enjoyed peacetime expansion in its history. In December 1996, when the S&P 500 index of equities stood at Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan asked, “Howdo we know when irratio exuberance has unduly escalated asset values?” But he was never

from again on this subject, even as the S&P more than doubled of 1527 in 2000. In 1994, Prof. Jeremy Siegel of the Wharton School publis Stocks for the Long Run, in whichhe pointed out that there been a long period of time in whichstocks had failed to bonds, cash and inflation. Whereas researchers at the University of Chicago had earlier that the normal returnon U.S. equities was in the vicinity in the 1990sthe average returnon the S&P was nearly 20%. The better stocks performed, the more capital investors allocated them. This was especially true of technology stocks, whichwere the clear market leaders. More tech stocks were addedto equity indices like the S&P meaning index and quasi-index investors had to buy more of them— whichmade them go up—which attracted still more capital to them. was a classic “virtuous circle,” and no one could imagine The absence of earnings at most “new-economy” companies elimin any requirementthat their stocks should sell at reasonable price/e ratios. In the latter stagesof the bubble, the pricesof some dot-com increased several hundred percent on the day of their initial offerings. To be willing to buy the new stocks at their prices, buyers who thought about it would have to have either (a) the companies’ founders had been happyto sell the stocks fraction of their true value or (b) the founders knew less about stocks’ value than the buyers did. Both of these conclusions were tenuous. In order to share in this miracle—and to avoid the pain of othersprofited—investors took part in IPOs of companies that had earnings (and in some cases no revenues) and about whose busine models they knew little or nothing. The year 1999 saw the publication of Dow 36,000, a book whose authors, JamesGlassman and KevinHassett, argued that because were so low in risk (see Siegel on page 217), they needn’t a risk premium as they historically had. That meanttheir pricesshould immediately rise to levelsfrom whichthey would offer appropriatel reduced prospective returns. Thus the Dow Jones Industrial Average deserved to more than triple from just over 10,000 at the time. The p/e ratio on the S&P 500—fueled by rampaging growth technology stocks—reached a high of 33 during the tech-stock fully double the post-war norm and the highest valuation in history up to that point in time.

So what ingredients actually were present? good economic news, favorable articles and books, carefree, risk-oblivious behavior on the part of investors, unusually strong investment returns, extremely high valuations relative to history, widespread willingness to pay pricesthat could not be justified analytically,and belief in a perpetual motion machine that would never stop. This last point is particularly important. Everybubble starts with a gra truth, as I noted earlier. But the import and profit potential of overestimated in bubbles; disbelief is suspended; and it is wide that the gains can roll on forever. Certainly an objective temperature-taker could have known the pieces in place for a substantial bubble that was likely to fall to earth of phenomena as I described them in “bubble.com” (January 2000 Webvan Group, whichstarted in business in 1999, had sales million and a $350,000 profit in the September quarter. The currently values it at $7.3 billion. On December 9, VA Linuxwent public at 30 and soared to $239, for a market value of $9.5 billion, half that of date, the company’s 1999 sales were $17.7 million and it had lost million (versus Apple’s profit of $600 million in the most months). Because the price/earnings ratios of Internet companies are so —usually negative—one may be forced to look to the price/s order to speak about valuation. Red Hat, for example, sells at about 1,000 times its annualized revenues in the August 1999 quarter. Among non-Internet tech companies, Yahoo! is worth$119 billion than General Motors and Ford together. At the current stock $432, its p/e ratio on 1999 estimated earnings is just over 1,000. Under these unusual circumstances, the Wall StreetJournal wrote o December 10, 1999 that “stock valuations take on an unusually la importance in gauging a business’s performance.” In other words— the absence of other signs—people must look to the share price f indication of how the company is doing. Isn’t that backwards? I old days, investors figured out how the business was doing and th set the share price to reflect it.

In this valuation parameter vacuum, a “lottery ticket mentality” seemsto govern the purchase decision. The model for investm the tech and dot-com companies isn’t the likelihood of a 20% o annual returnbased on projected earnings and p/e ratios, but a a 1,000% gain based on a concept. The pitch may be, “We’re for first-round financing for a company valued at $30 million think can IPO in two years at $2 billion.” Or maybe it’s “ be priced at $20. It may end the day at $100 and be a months.” Would you play? Couldyou stand the risk of saying no and wrong? The pressure to buy can be immense. Therehave always been ideas, stocks and IPOs that produced great profits. Yet the pressure to participate wasn’t as great as it because in the past the winners made millions, not billions, a years,not months. The upside in the deals that’ve worked s been 100-to-1 (give or take a zero). With that kind of potential, ( upside becomes irresistible and (b) it doesn’t take a very h probability of success to justify the investment. I have said in that while the market is usually driven by fear and greed, the biggest motivator is the fear of missing out. Neverwas th as today. This only intensifies the pressure to join in and c out on that limb of risk. The bottom line is that in an extreme bubble like this on investor doesn’t have to make fine distinctions.All you have to be is identify nutty behavior when you see it. To me—as an obser in detached fashion from the sidelines, ratherthan someone with skin tech-investing game—the events of the tech/Internet craze had the of a Hans Christian Andersen tale. Thosewho participated in it so roll on that no one would step forward to say the emperor Developments like those just described were signs of the mass hysteria part of every bubble. Thosewho were enriched by the performance of equities in the especially by the tech and Internet stocks—took it to foretell prosperity and wealth creation, and they responded to the returns enjoyed by ratcheting up their expectations for futurereturns. (As Munger quotes the ancient Greekstatesman and oratorDemosthenes, what each man wishes, that he also believes to be true.”) But concluded that euphoria-driven buying in the 1990shad overpaid for and borrowed from futureperformance, with highly negative implication just took a couple of years for them to be proved right.

The eventual result in 2000–02 was (a) the first three-year decline stock market since 1929–31, with a 49% drop in the S&P 500 from bottom (ignoring income), (b) massive declines in tech stocks, of 100%on many Internet and e-commerce stocks. ∾ Usually one would expect that the painful deflating of such had been driven by excesses of optimism and credulousness—would serious instructional impact, meaning it would take a decad another such bubble to arise. But that was not to be the case. important, I’m going to repeatonce more what John Kenneth Galbraith said about the learning of financial lessons: Contributing to . . . euphoria are two further factors time or in past times.The first is the extreme brevity of th memory. In consequence, financial disaster is quickly forgotte further consequence, when the same or closely similar circum occur again,sometimes in only a few years,they are hailedby a n often youthful, and always supremely self-confident generation as a brilliantly innovative discovery in the financial and largereconomic world. The events that only a few years later beganto lead to the su mortgage boom—adequately described earlier in this book—provided example of the way cyclical excesses are built on error: As I wrote on page 119, some U.S. leaders decided that only come from increased home ownership. The federal agencies charged with issuing mortgages got the and ramped up the availability of mortgages. Declining interest rates made mortgages—and thus home ownership— increasinglyaffordable. Increased home affordability and increased mortgage availability allowed home buying to increase and the demand for homes This increased demand caused the pricesof homes to increa substantially. The canard that “home pricesonly go up” becam accepted truth, feeding back to produce still more demand for The further platitude that “therecan never be a nationwide wave mortgage defaults” caused mortgage backed securities to be primecandidates for investment, particularly by financial institutions. Wall Streetcame forward with a model for securitizing prosaic, home mortgages into tranched collateralized debt obligations—the next

high-return, low-risk thing. The construction and selling of CDOs and other mortgage securities (MBS) addedgreatly to bank profits. With relaxed regulations allowing banksto employ materially greate leverage, large amounts of capital were available for investment equity required for MBS creation. The meteoric growth of MBS packaging created rapidly increa demand for the essential raw material in the process: newly mortgages. In order to expand the volume of mortgages they issued, novel ways to increase their appeal to borrowers: interest-only that minimized monthly payments by eliminating the traditional requirementthat the principal balance be paid down; adjustable-ra mortgages that allowed borrowers to benefit from the ultra-low rates at the short end of the yield curve; and, most importantly, prime” mortgages (sometimes called“liar loans”) that didn’trequire applicants to document income and employment. With sub-prime mortgages being packaged into securities and sold onward, as opposed to being retained as in the past, lender shifted from borrowers’ creditworthiness to loan volume. With lender being paid fees simply for making loans—and able to sell them immediately and thus retain no risk of default—there was no them to worryabout the creditworthiness of their borrowers. Clearly gave them perverse incentives. (Incentives like these—which allow participants to engage in pro-risk behavior without having about the consequences—were described in the Global Financial as creating “moral hazard,” a term that came into widespread it’s heard less often these days, the concept survives, and it remain dangerous.) The key to the purported success of sub-prime mortgage backe securities lay in “financial engineering” performed by “quants” Ph.D.’s, many of them in their first jobs. They modeled risk based flawed assumption that mortgage defaults would remain uncorr and benign as in the past. The creation of large amounts of sub-prime MBS meantthere was of business for the ratingagencies whose imprimatur was essent these profitable assignmentswould go to the agency that provid highest rating. This led to ratings shopping and created incentives, this time supporting widespread ratings inflation. Thesetrendscaused the ratingagencies to issue many thousands of triple-A ratings to mortgage backed securities (as compared U.S. companies enjoying triple-A ratings at the time).Rating

personnel clearly lacked the ability to fully understand the they were assessing. Banks and other financial institutions bought huge amounts of abetted by “risk-management” techniques such as Valueat Risk relied heavily on the short, benign history and overly genero and thus vastlyunderstated the risk buyers were assuming. All of the aboveoccurred in and was facilitated by risk-obliviou attitudes characterized by risk-is-gonerhetoric (see page 120). So what was at the root of the formation of this bubble? Ac “NowIt’s All Bad?” (September 2007): . . . a standard combination that proved perfectly in underlying greed, good returns in the up-leg of the cycle, euphoria and complacency, a free-and-easy credit market, Wall Street’s inventiveness and salesmanship, and investors’ naiveté. The resulting developments that fed the upswing are clear: a huge decrease in risk aversion, and thus the disappearance skepticism, the acceptance of sweeping positive generalizations regarding homes mortgages, excessive faith in new tools like financial engineering and risk management, and widespread blindness to the impact of improper incentives on participants in the process. In addition to short memories, psychological excesses and logical the bubble that arose in mortgage backed securities was abetted additional factors: Because this new bubble arose in mortgage-land—apart of the markets completely separate from that whichhad been visited by tech and Internet bubble—the fixed income investors and financ institutions it appealed to were ones who hadn’t been affected by the other, and hadn’t learned from it. The terrible recentperformance of equities had so discouraged investors—and interest rates brought low by the dovish Fed

diminished the yieldsavailable on fixed income investments—that investors gave up on obtaining strong returns from stocks That rendered them highly susceptible to the promise of a returnwithout risk: mortgage backed securities. This is a good time for a valuable aside. Falling for the su asset that will provide returnwithout risk, or what I call the “silv (dating back to The Lone Ranger, a 1950sTV Western about a gunshots never missed)—isone of investors’ greatest recurring failings. exemplifies “whatevery man wishes,” as Demosthenes said, but it make sense.If there were a silver bullet: Why would the purveyor offer it to you ratherthan buying And wouldn’t everyone else buy it and drive up its price to whereit’s no longer a sure thing? I’ve seen dozens of silver bullets touted over the course of career. Not one has proved out. No investment strategy or tactic deliver a high returnwithout risk, especially to buyers lacking investing skill. Outstandinginvestment results can only come from exceptional skill (or perhaps in isolated moments from good luck). As I said earlier, bubbles generally spring from a grain of all taken too far, and their eventual puncturing brings the greatest investment world. Beliefin a silver bullet underlies many bubbles. The that investors are willing to swallow a promise of returnwitho infallible indicator that skepticism is in short supply, psychology is overheated, and the subject asset is overestimated and thus probably overpriced. Watch out for it, and resist if you can. By definition, comes to bubbles, few people do. I would sum up the key conclusion this way: The sub-prime mo bubble arose from broad acceptance that phenomena would work that had never before been seen in action. The analysis of investment vehic entail (a) the application of skepticism and conservative assumptions examination over a long history that includes some tryingtimes.Thes were clearly missing. In fact, most bubbles, if not all, are characterized by the un acceptance of thingsthat have never held true in the past; of valuations are dramatically out of line with historic norms; and/or of techniques and tools that haven’t been tested. ∾

The sub-prime mortgage bubble demonstrated an extremely important principle in actionthat I haven’t touched upon before now. The investment environment—and the performance of investment techniques instruments—is not immutable. Rather, as I’ve said many times with regar cycles, these thingsare affected by the involvement of people. Thereis no such thing as a market that is separate from—a —the people who make it up. The behavior of the people in changes the market. Whentheir attitudes and behavior change, the will change. In the case at hand: market forceschanged the participants’ motivations, as just these changed motivations changed their behavior, and their changed behavior clearly determined the results. An essential progression was at work, as is clear to see: History was taken as saying there couldn’t be a nationwide mortgage defaults. Acceptance of this benign history caused vast sums to be mortgage backed securities. It permitted the securities to be structured aggressively. It also caused ratingagencies to extrapolate the benign experi grant high ratings. Most importantly,the strong demand for mortgage backed securi created a need for the raw material—mortgage loans—and led eagerness to issue them that caused lending standards to deterio Thesedevelopments, taken together, virtually guaranteed that there wouldbe a nationwide wave of mortgage defaults. As I mentioned earlier, because of the impact of careless —the import of whichwent largely unnoticed and unremarkedat the the default experience on mortgages issued from the late 1990sthrou turned out to be much worsethan it historically had been; worsethan security structurers and ratingagencies had thought possible; and wors buyers’ models had said it would be. Ignoring this possibility significant contributionto the creation of the sub-prime mortgage bubb occurrence caused the resulting crisis. The key is to understand that the behavior of investors can alt changing the results that investors can expect the market to reflects George Soros’s theory of reflexivity:

In situations that have thinking participants,the participants’ . . distorted viewscan influence the situation to whichthey relate because false viewslead to inappropriate actions. (“Soros: Genera Theory of Reflexivity,” Financial Times, October 26, 2009) People tryingto understand how thingswork in the economic and fin worlds should take this lesson very much to heart. ∾ All it takes for the perpetual motion machine to grind to a one or two assumptions and the operation of some general rules Interest rates can go up as well as down. Platitudes can fail to hold. Improper incentives can lead to destructive behavior. Attempts to quantify risk in advance—particularly as to novel products for whichthere is no history—will often be unavailing. The “worst case” can indeed be exceeded on the downside. The error in all these thingsis always clear in hindsight. But the practices with regard to mortgages and mortgage backed securities— became so prominent and important—were taking place in an obscu of the financial world. Thus they were invisible to chief investment portfolio strategists, equity investors, alternative investment managers, traditional bond buyers, and seemingly even mortgage investors. We at Oaktree were fortunate in the years in whichthe mortgag arose—leading up to the Global Financial Crisis—to understand that credit cycle was becoming extended in the upward direction, and thus markets were increasinglyprecarious. This led us to sell assets; repla liquidating distressed debt funds with smaller ones; increase our level of consciousness and conservatism; and raise a stand-by fund several largest ever in order to take advantage of the distressed debt oppo felt mightmaterialize. What was the basis on whichwe did this? In retrospect it was ea although it never seemsas easy in real time. All you really had to 07 was make the following general observations: the Fed had reduced the base rate of interest to very low to ward off the depressing effects of the tech bubble’s burstin as concern over Y2K; because of the low yieldsavailable on Treasurys and high grade as well as the disenchantment with equities that had resulted

three-year decline in 2000–02, investors were eager to put money alternative instruments; investors had shrugged off the pain of the collapse of the 2000 and the telecom meltdown and corporate scandals of 2001– thus little risk aversion was present (especially in areas other than equities, whichremained out of favor), rendering investors genera eager for investmentsin exotic, structured and synthetic instruments; as a result of all the above, the markets were wide open of low-quality debt, poorly structured instruments and untested alternatives. Thesewere our observations, and it was the last that most calledou attention to the negative trendsthat were afoot. It felt like there wasn on whicheither BruceKarshor I didn’tvisit each other’s officeto comp about a newlyissued security, saying, “It shouldn’t be possible piece of junk like this. The fact that it is means there’s some the market.” Thoserisky deals told us fear, skepticism and risk aversion insufficient,and greed, gullibility and risk tolerance were in the ascen The implications of this combination are never good. All the pointsnoted here were obvious and not subject to debate. mattered is whether you made these observations and drew the appro conclusions. You didn’thave to fully understand what was wrong with primemortgages or deconstruct mortgage backed securities and highly structured collateralized debt obligations. We certainly didn’t. And, by the way, in those years when the mortgage bubble was bu stocks weren’t doing well or selling at lofty multiples, and the wasn’t booming (and thus necessarily heading for a recession). But made the observations just listed,you likely would have concluded, as that it was time to reduce the quantum of risk in your portf all it took. And here are the results of the bursting of the mortgage bu associated contagion, as shown in the performance of some of investment indices in 2008, the year it all came apart. Clearly it whichit was enormously important to have reduced risk. Standard & Poor’s 500 Stocks (37.0)% Dow Jones Industrial Average (31.9) NASDAQ Composite (40.0) MSCI Europe,Australasia, Far East Stocks (45.1) Citigroup High Yield Market Index (25.9) Merrill Lynch Global High Yield European Issuer Index (in Euro) (32.6) Credit Suisse Leveraged Loan Index (28.8) Credit Suisse Western European Loan Index (in Euro) (30.2)

∾ Finally in discussing how to detectand respond to market cycle want to returnonce more to the widespread panic that followed the bankruptcy filing by Lehman Brothers in September 2008. Although the sub-prime mortgage crisis originated in a small corner financial and investment world, the impact was soon felt widely, by the financial institutions that had underestimated the risk in mort backed securities and thus invested too heavily in them. As a threat to these essential institutions, the impact metastasized to the bond markets in all countries—and then to economies all around in the form of the Global Financial Crisis. Thus, as I described earlier, money market funds and commerc to be guaranteed by the U.S. government. A number of prom financial institutions failed or had to be bailedout/rescued/absorbed. No knew how far the carnage would spread. The equity and debt collapsed. Now the generalizing was on the negative side: “the finan system could totally melt down” in a vicious circle without Since the generalizations were on the downside, the error-making ma went into reverse. No greed, only fear. No optimism, only pessimism. tolerance, only risk aversion. No ability to see positives, only nega willingness to interpret thingspositively, only negatively. No ability to imagine good outcomes, only bad. Thus we reached the day on whic the discussion mentioned back on pages 131–132, in whichthe pension head was unable or unwilling to accept that any assumption regar possible defaults could be conservative enough. What was the essential observation? Here’s what I wrote in “T Negativism” (October 2008): Contrarianism—doing the opposite of what othersdo, or “leaning against the wind”—is essential for investment success. But as th credit crisis reached a peak last week,people succumbed to the w ratherthan resisting. I foundvery few who were optimistic; most were pessimistic to some degree. Some became genuinely depressed—even a few great investors I know. Increasingly negative tales o coming meltdown were exchanged via email. No one applied skepticism, or said “that horror story’s unlikely to be true.” P fed on itself. People’s only concern was bullet-proofing their portfolios to get through the coming collapse, or raising e to meet redemptions. The one thing they weren’t doing last week w

making aggressive bids for securities. So pricesfell and fell, several pointsat a time—the old expression is “gapped down.” The key—as usual—was to become skeptical of what “everyone” was saying and doing. One mighthave said, “Sure, the negativ may turn out to be true, but certainly it’s priced into the m there’s little to be gained from betting on it. On the o turns out not to be true, the appreciation from today’s depress will be enormous. I buy!” The negative story may have looked compelling, but it’s the positive story—which few believed—that held, and still holds,the greater potential for profit. At this market cycle extreme, all the news truly was negative . certainly not imaginary. The only questions I received were “Howfar go?” and “What will be the effects?” Giventhat asset pricesreflected but abjectpessimism regarding these things—I’d say near-suicidal thinking— the key to profiting lay in recognizing that even in the face of news and a very poor outlook, pessimism can be overdone, and thus can become too cheap. It was the excessiveness of the prevailing pessimism that led me “The Limits to Negativism” at the credit market’s low ebb in In it I pointed out, as mentioned in the chapter on attitu the superior investor’s essential skepticism “calls for pessimism when optimism is excessive. But it also calls for optimism when pessimism excessive.” That variety of skepticism was totally lacking in the darkest days, of course. Shortly after Lehman’s bankruptcy filing on September 15, 2008, Bruce Karshand I reached the conclusion that (a) no one could know how financial institution meltdown would go, but (b) negativity was certa rampant and very possibly excessive, and assetslooked terribly cheap Thinking strategically, we decided that if the financial worldende no one could rule out—it wouldn’t matter whether we’d bought the worlddidn’tend and we hadn’t bought, we would have failed job. So we bought debt aggressively. Oaktree invested more than a dollars a week over the fifteen weeks from September 15 throu the year. Some days we thought we were going too fast, and some days slow; that probably meantwe had it about right. The worlddidn’tend; the vicious cycle of financial institution implosion stopped with Lehman Brothers; the capital markets reopened; the financial institutions came life; debt was again able to be refinanced; bankruptcies turned out few relative to history; and the assetswe bought appreciated subst short, paying heed to the cycle was rewarded.

∾ Whilewe’re reviewing the climate in late 2008, this is an appropriate a discussion of investor behavior on the way to, and at, mark First, what is a bottom? It’s the point when the lowest pricesof are reached. Thus a bottom can be viewed as the day the sells, or the last day on whichsellers predominate relative to whatever reason, it’s the last day pricesgo down, and thus the their nadir. (Of course these definitions are highly exaggerated. The expression “a bottom”—like “a top”—describes a period of time, Thus the phrase “the last day” is mostly a figureof speech.) pricesrise, since there are no holders left to capitulate and sell, or buyers now want to buy more strongly than the sellers want to The question I want to touch on here is, “When should on made reference in earlier chapters to “falling knives,” whichconst important concept. Whena market is cascading downward, investors often be heard to say, “We’re not going to try to catch a fallin other words, “The trend is downward and there’s no way to know stop, so why should we buy before we’re sure the bottom has What I think they’re really saying is, “We’re scared—in particula buying before the decline has stopped, and thus of looking going to wait until the bottom has been reached, the dust has settle uncertainty has been resolved.” But hopefully by now I’ve made it abun clear that when the dust has settled and investors’ nerves have stead bargains will be gone. At Oaktree, we strongly reject the idea of waiting for the bo buying. First, there’s absolutely no way to know when the bottom has reached. There’s no neon sign that lights up. The bottom can recognized only after it has been passed, since it is defined before the recovery begins. By definition, this can be identif after the fact. And second, it’s usually during market slides that you can quantities of the thing you want, from sellers who are throwing towel and while the non-knife-catchers are hugging the sidelines. once the slide has culminated in a bottom, by definition there sellers left to sell, and during the ensuing rally it’s buyers predominate. Thus the selling dries up and would-be buyers growing competition.

We beganto buy distressed debt immediately after Lehman filed for bankruptcy protection in mid-September 2008 as described on page 235, we continued through year-end, as priceswent lower and lower. By quarter of 2009, other investors had collected themselves, caught on values that were available, and gathered some capital for investment the motivated sellers done selling and buying having begun, them to buy in size without pushing up prices. Like so many other thingsin the investment worldthat mightbe tried on the basis of certitude and precision, waiting for the bottom to great example of folly. So if targeting the bottom is wrong, buy? The answer’s simple: when price is belowintrinsic value.What if price continues downward? Buy more, as now it’s probably an even great bargain. All you need for ultimate success in this regard is intrinsic value,(b) the emotional fortitude to persevere, and (c) even have your estimate of value proved correct. ∾ Here’s how the prominent investment indices did the following year. returns that were available in 2009 show the importance of having a cycle at a negative extreme and having bought in (or through) the accompanying chaos. Standard & Poor’s 500 Stocks 26.5% Dow Jones Industrial Average 22.7 NASDAQ Composite 45.4 MSCI Europe,Australasia, Far East Stocks (in US$)27.8 Citigroup High Yield Market Index 55.2 BofA Merrill Lynch Global High Yield European Issuer Index 83.0 Credit Suisse Leveraged Loan Index 44.9 Credit Suisse Western European Loan Index (in Euro) 47.2 It’s time for another aside:If you look at the last two tables—t showing big lossesin 2008 and big gains in 2009—it’s easy to conc the two years together were something of a non-event. For example, put $100 into the Credit Suisse Leveraged Loan Index on the first 2008, you would have lost 29% over the course of the year and left at the end. But then you would have gained 45% in 2009 with $103 at the conclusion of the two-year period, for a net two-year results in the asset classes listed aboveranged from mode lossesto moderate net gains. It matters enormously, however, what you did in between. Ye would have enabled you to recoup most or all of your losse

with results as described above. But if you lost your nerve and trough—or if, having bought with borrowed money, you received call you couldn’t meet and saw your positions sold out from under you— experiencedthe decline but not the recovery, and your net result in event” two-year period was disastrous. For this reason, it’s important to note that exiting the market —andthus failing to participate in a cyclical rebound—is truly sin in investing. Experiencing a mark-to-market loss in the down of a cycle isn’t fatal in and of itself, as long as you hold throu upward part as well. It’s converting that downward fluctuation into a permanent loss by selling out at the bottom that’s really terrible. Thus understanding cycles and having the emotional and financial wherewithal needed to live through them is an essential ingre investment success. ∾ Before I declare victory in the Global Financial Crisisand state firmly that the success my colleagues and I enjoyed in this cycle wasn’t inevitable. That’s because—reflecting Elroy Dimson’s theme—the good outcome we got wasn’t the only outcome that could materialized. I’m convinced that if Hank Paulson, Tim Geithner and Bernanke hadn’t acted when they did, or if they had acted differently, their actions hadn’t been as successful as they were, a financial replay of the Great Depression absolutely could have occurred. In that our actions wouldn’t have been cause for celebration. I fear that people may look back at the decline of 2008 an that followed and conclude that declines can always be depended recouped promptly and easily, and thus there’s nothing to worr down-cycles. But I think those are the wrong lessons from the the outcome that actually occurred was so much better than some of “alternative histories” (as Nassim Nicholas Taleb calls them)that could have occurred instead. And if those incorrect lessons are the ones that as I believe they may have been, then they’re likely to bring on increases the amplitude of another dramatic boom/bust cycle someday, one with more serious and long-lastingramifications for investors and of society. But thingsdid break for us in the recovery from the Crisis, an “long” investors. Certainly we positioned our clients’ portfolios corre the futurethat materialized, and a lot of it was because of way in whichpsychological and market cycles operate. Giventhe predict the future, that’s the best anyone can do.

∾ Bubbles and crashes have a pattern all their own: a logic—or essence of whichrhymes from one instance to the next. The three reviewed here show the oscillation of the cycle at its most extreme, hopefully they provide an indication of how cycles can be recog dealt with. I want to make a few last, essential points. First, every element in the progressions I’ve described was clear the time, providing investors could keep their emotions and distorted perception from getting in the way. Second, drawing the essential inferences—and thus taking the appropriate actions—didn’t require any forecasting at all. The descriptionsof the actualprogressions are compelling, with no guesse needed regarding the future. The events and resulting cyclic dictated profitable behavior. Finally, however, while I say the events were self-evident and implications obvious, I want to state definitively that nothing the time. Even the best and least emotional among us are subjec same inputsand stimuli as everyone else. We were never sure, but did the right thing nevertheless. And while the errorsleading up Global Financial Crisiswere easilyrecognizable, the timing of correcting was absolutely beyond predicting. The best investors can act in light of what they see in the environment. But they mind what John Maynard Keynes is reputed to have said: “The can remain irrational longer than you can remain solvent.” ∾ To close on the subject of dealing with cyclical events, I more example, from 1991. Leveraged buyouts had boomed in the 1980 thanks to the ability of buyers of companies to access debt capital, often ranging up to 95% of the total purchase price many of the subject companies being saddled with debt they wouldn’t to service in the recession that followed; to large numbers of bankruptcies; and thus to high yield bonds’ first crisis.Thesedevelopme came to a head just after we formed our FundsII and IIb for Here’s how I assessed the environment in a letter to their 23, 1991:

In general, the market pricesof distressed company debt decline during 1990. Some of this was driven by fundamentals, as th value of all assetsweakened along with the economy, and some was due to “technical conditions,”meaning the supply of this sort o ballooned and buyers were discouragedand withdrew. The worsening economic and psychological climate gives us the opportunity to pick and choose among a large number of p investmentsat bargain prices. The environment is dreary, a what one buys is soon quoted lower, and there is no ebullien Theseare exactly the conditions under whichwe want to be working. Whenbuyers are enjoying themselves, and when they are exchanging “high fives”because everything they buy goes higher the next day and makes them feel smart, the “pain index” is to buyers are emboldened. Today’s conditions tell me we are more likely to be getting bargains than if we were having fun. Thereare few competing b to drive up the pricesof the thingswe want to buy. Each purchas price is more likely to turn out to have been a “low”than a “ short, this is a good time to be putting money to work in investment area such as ours. We cannot presume to begin investing on the day the econ market hit bottom. Our greatest hope is that the low point w sometime during the period when we are actively investing a and that we will buy on the way to, during, and after that m This is a good example of taking the temperatureof the ma time . . . not just because it was me who took it, and out to be right (the distressed debt funds we were investing at that some of the highest returns we’veever achieved). Rather, it was it detected and pushed back against the depressing emotional influ were keeping othersfrom buying. It shows we knew the “dreary” and mark-to-market lossesthat were driving buyers away were more likely have favorable ratherthan unfavorableimplications for subsequent returns, and that declining pricesare good for buyers, not bad. Understanding what thingsreally mean—rather than how they make investors feel—is the first step toward doing the thingsthat are right times. ∾ Having allowed this chapter to reach great length, I’m going to general discussion of how to think about positioning a portfolio as moves through its cycle.

I think it’s helpful to take an organized approach to what I risks.” What I’m talking about here is the fact that investors have with two possible sources of error. The first is obvious: the risk money. The second is a bit more subtle: the risk of missi Investors can eliminate either one, but doing so will expose them entire the other. So most people balance the two. What should an investor’s normal stance be regarding the tw balanced, or favoring one or the other? The answer depends goals,circumstances, personality and ability to withstand risk (and on same thingswith regard to one’s clients, if any). And separate and apart from his normal posture, should the inv the balance from time to time? And if so, how? I think investors appropriately adjusttheir stance if they (a) feel they have the requi and (b) are willing to expend effort and bear the risk of being should do this based on wherethe market is in its cycle.In market is high in its cycle,they should emphasize limiting the losingmoney, and when the market is low in its cycle,they shou reducing the risk of missing opportunity. How?Try to travel into the futureand look back. In 2023, do you thi you’re more likely to say, “Back in 2018, I wish I’d been more “Back in 2018, I wish I’d been more defensive”? And is there anyth about whichyou’dbe likely to say, “In 2018, I missed the chance to buy xyz”?What you think you mightsay a few years down the road help you figureout what you should do today. The abovedecisions relate directly to the choice between aggressiv and defensiveness. Whenan investor wantsto reduce his chance money, he should investmore defensively.More worried about missing opportunity? In that case, increased aggressiveness is calledfor. Vary one’s stance should be done in response to wherethe market cycle and, again,this can be approached in terms of how the market and how other investors are behaving—the two elements in assessing market mentioned earlier. Whenmost investors are behaving aggressively, that’s a good signaltha the market is a risky place,since little risk aversion is being appli investors’ aggressiveness is likely to have resulted directly in eleva prices. In both ways, as I mentioned on page 211, the aggressiven makes the market risky for us. A good way to think about this decision is to consider whichatt right for the current market environment. In late 2008/early 2009 needed only two thingsto make a lot of money: money to to investit. If he had those two things, he made a lot of that followed. In retrospect, what he didn’tneed was caution, conservativ

risk control, discipline, selectivity and patience; the more of those thing had, the less money he made. Does that mean “money and nerve” is always a surefire for investment success? Absolutely not. If an investor had money and early 2007, he bore the full brunt of the Global Financial Crisis. he needed caution, conservativism, risk control, discipline, selectivity patience. Moreover, even in late 2008/early 2009, intelligent investors couldn’t completely abandon caution and discipline, because there was way for them to know that the recovery from the GFC would be the aftermath so relatively painless for investors. At Oaktree, we lot, but we emphasized the seniordebt of high-qualitycompanies, not the juniordebt and weaker issuers in which, as it turned out, even more money. Among the many factors that make investing interesting is the fac there’s no tactic or approach that always works. The only way correctly positioned as the cycle moves is to make well-reasoned and adjustthe attributes employed. But it’s not easy. One way people tend to respond to the challenges these days is “What inning are we in?” Ever since the financial meltdown in encounteredthis question on a regular basis. What people really mean “Where do we stand in the cycle?” In the fourthquarter of wondered, “Howmuch of the pain has been felt already, and how much lies ahead?” More recently they’ve been inquiring primarily about the cycle:how much longer will it continue on the upswing—making borrow—and when will credit availability begin to tighten? I consider these questions in the light of my sense for how far gone, and I answer in the form the questioners want: second innin getting started), fifth inning (game half over),or eighth innin end). But recently I’ve become more conscious of the limitation of approach: unlike a normal baseball game,we have no way to a particular cycle will go on. Thereis no regulation length. A game will last nine innings, but an economic or market cycle could nine, twelve or fourteen. Thesethingsare not knowable. None of these approaches offersa foolproof technique for deciding ho position portfolios. There’ll all just ways to think systematically abou something that isn’t subject to easy answers. But hopefully they sugg route that’s superior to deciding on the basis of emotion, guesswork following the herd. How you deal with cycles is one of the most important thingsin Cycles will happen to you. What you do in response is key.