XIV CYCLE POSITIONING Successfully positioning a portfolio for the market movements th aheadis dependent on what you do (turning aggressive or defensi and when you do it (based on a superior understanding o implyfor futuremarket moves). I once knew a man who was congenitally optimistic and aggressiv perhaps because he’d had the good sense to be born rich and had charmed life. He never exhibited self-doubt or seemed to question accuracy of his forecasts or the likelihood that his stratagems woul He was aggressive as long as I knew him, in what turned out time for aggressiveness. That experience inspired me to coin a phras describe the forcesat work: Thereare three ingredients for success—aggressiveness, timing and skill—and if you have enough aggressiveness at the right time, y don’t need that much skill. ∾ In February 2017, I foundmyself working on the final chapters while on vacation in India. One day I visited one of the world Jaipur’s Amer Fort—and attempted to capture a small fraction of photos. Whilereviewing my photos afterwards, I had the good luck stumble on some I had taken a few months earlier in anoth China. In the course of that visit, a Beijing-based client had asked me provocative questions, and in answering them I made some scribbles, as often do, on a whiteboard. Answers came to me that day that hadn my mind before. Recognizing that, I took photos of the board before leaving. (What an innovation: twenty years ago I woul had a camera at a presentation.) Threemonths later, while revie photographic handiwork at the Amer Fort, I came across those photo

Chinaand thought back to those ideas for the first time. They’ll provi of the grist for this chapter. Now I foundmyself in bed in India, after a night’s sleep cu 10½-hour time difference from New York. For some reason, a connection dawned between the abovesaying about success, my photos from and the question of how to deal with cycles. In short, I had how to parse the main componentsof investment skill. (Note that I say “a connection dawned” ratherthan “I made a co I consciously choose the passive form here, because I often do that ideas “come to me,” ratherthan feeling I develop them throu effortful, intentional process. That’s how many of my insights arise aided by the reduction of a thought to a graphic representat made in China. That’s just how my mind works.) Back when I first arrived at the explanation of success statedab word “timing” I had meant“lucky timing.” After all, what could be than being aggressive at a fortuitous time? But lying in bed in India that good timing doesn’t have to be exclusively the result of luck. good timing in investing can come from diligently assessing wherewe a cycle and then doing the right thing as a result. The study of about how to position your portfolio for the possible outcomes that That, in one sentence, is what this book is about. ∾ I’d like to returnto that simple sentence and apply a little more regarding the formula for investment success. I conclude that it considered in terms of six main components, or ratherthree pairings: Cyclepositioning—the process of deciding on the risk posture portfolio in response to your judgments regarding the principal Asset selection—the process of deciding whichmarkets, market and specific securities or assetsto overweight and underweight Positioning and selection are the two main tools in portfolio managem It may be an over-simplification, but I think everything investors under one or the other of these headings. Aggressiveness—the assumption of increased risk: risking more of capital; holding lower-quality assets; making investmentsthat reliant on favorable macro outcomes; and/or employing financ leverage or high-beta (market-sensitive)assetsand strategies Defensiveness—the reduction of risk: investing less capital and cash instead; emphasizing safer assets; buying thingsthan can

relatively well even in the absence of prosperity; and/or shunn leverage and beta The choice between aggressiveness and defensiveness is the pri dimension in whichinvestors position portfolios in response to wher think they stand in the cycles and what that implies for futuremark developments. Skill—the ability to make these decisions correctly on balance certainly not in every case) through a repeatable intellectual proces on the basis of reasonable assumptions regarding the future. this has come to be known by its academic name:“alpha” Luck—what happens on the many occasions when skill and reason assumptions prove to be of no avail—that is, when randomness effect on events than do rational processes, whether resulting breaks” or “tough luck” Skill and luck are the primeelements that determine the success of portfolio management decisions. Without skill on an investor’s part, shouldn’t be expected to produce success. In fact, there’s some negative skill, and for people who are saddled with it, flipping abstaining from decisions would lead to better results. And luck is wildcard; it can make good decisions fail and bad ones succeed, but the short run. In the long run, it’s reasonable to expect skill to Part of my Indian awakening—stemming from my ruminationsin Ch concerned the dichotomy between selection and positioning, and the way skill influences the outcome of those two pursuits. A market will do what it will do. Some of the outcome wi economic events and corporate profitability; some will be determined investor psychology and the resulting behavior; and some will be deter by randomnessor luck. We may have some ideas about what the futurewill bring in terms of market performance, they may be based on soun defective reasoning, and they may prove to be right or wrong. But the market’s futureperformance—whateverit will be, whether knowable not—as the starting point for our discussion here. Let’s express the expectation for a market’s behavior as a probability distribution:

This is the starting point or baseline—the canvas, if you wi investor’s actions. The question is whether he has the skill requi improve on the market’s performance through activedecision maki whether he should give up on doing so and instead investpassi for market performance. I mentioned abovethe two main ways in whichan investor can ad returns: cycle positioning and asset selection. I’ll start by going into great depth regarding the first. As I also said, I believe cycle positioning primarily consists of between aggressiveness and defensiveness: increasing and decreasing exposure to market movements. Let’s say you conclude you’re in a propitious environment: the economic and profit cycle are on the rise and/or likely to exceed people’s expectations, investor psychology and attitudes toward risk are depressed (or sober) ratherthan feverish, and thus asset pricesare moderate to low relative to intrinsic value. In such a case, aggressiveness is calledfor. So you increase yo commitments and add to your portfolio’s risk posture and “beta” sensitivity). The dotted line in the graphic belowshows the outlo performance. You have increased your potential for gains if the mark well and for lossesif it does poorly.

If your judgments are validated by a market rise, your aggressiv positioned portfolio, with its enhanced market sensitivity, will rise even making you an outperformer, as shown in the following graph The recipefor success here consists of (a) thoughtful analysis of market stands in its cycle,(b) a resulting increase in aggre being proved right. Thesethingscan be summed up as “skill” or cycle positioning. Of course, “c”—being proved right—isn’t fully a matte within anyone’s control, in particular because of the degree

subject to randomness. So being proved right won’thappen every to skillful investors who reason thingsout well. On the other hand, your analysis mighttell you the cycle positioning is poor—the economy is tiring,psychology is excessively optimistic, and thus so are asset prices—meaning you should tend toward defensiveness. case, you should take some capital off the table and otherwise cut with a portfolio described by the graphic at the top of the Now you’ve cut your beta and prepared for bad times.If you’re the cycle,the market’s performance will be drawn from the left-h the probability distribution,and your defensive positioning will make you an outperformer in that market, losingless, again as shown by the the graph below. Your portfolio, being defensive, is less exposed to movements and thus right for a weak market:

Of course not everyone has a superior understanding of cy efforts at positioning are successful. Suppose an investor who lacks regarding positioning decides to turn defensive and cuts his market as shown. If the market surprises on the upside, he turns his investmentsunderperform:

In the first chapter I introduced the subject of “tendencies.” the market should be considered via a probability distribution,and distribution—if constructed accurately—will give you a sense for its likely tendency. The market’s movement through the cycle repositions the distribution and thus influences its likely futuretendency, as I showed pages 204–206. Whenthe market is low in its cycle,gains are more likely than us lossesare less likely. The reverse is true when the market is Positioning moves, based on whereyou believe the market stands amount to tryingto better prepare your portfolio for the events Whileyou can always be unlucky regarding the relationship between logically should happen and what actually does happen, good posit decisions can increase the chance that the market’s tendency—and chance for outperformance—will be on your side. In 1977, New York City experienceda wave of lovers’ lane murders perpetrated by a serial killer labeled “the Son of Sam.” In 2014 obituary of Timothy Dowd, the detective who caught him. I whereit quoted him as saying it was his job “to prepare my view of the futureas indeterminate and subject to considerab randomness, I think that’s a great way to think about it. Whileit like I’m advocating being passive and leaving thingsto chance, the that superior investors have favorably skewed distributions of outco not batting averages of 1.000. They still need favorable outcomes: the right tickets to be drawn from the bowl. One of the best ways to enjoy the skewed distribution of outcome markssuperior investors is to get the market’s tendency on your outcome will never be under your control, but if you investwhen the tendency is biased toward favorable, you’llhave the wind at your the tendency is biased toward unfavorable, the reverse will analysis of cycles can give you a better-than-average understand market’s likely tendency and thus enable you to improve your chan properly positioning your portfolio for what lies ahead. ∾ What follows is completely unrelated to the subject of cycles, you’re interested in, you needn’t read it. But I want to comp of the actions investors can take to improve performance by other component of portfolio management: asset selection. Asset selection consists of identifying markets, market sectors an individual assetsthat will do better or worsethan the rest, and over- and underweighting them in portfolios. The higher an asset’s price is intrinsic value,the less well it should be expected to do (all

equal), and vice versa.The key prerequisite for superior performance regard is above-average insight into the asset’s intrinsic value futurechanges in that value,and the relationship between its intrinsic and its current market price. All investors who follow a given asset have (or should have) op regarding its intrinsic value.The market price of the asset reflects consensus of those opinions, meaning investors collectively have set the price. That’s wherebuyers and sellers agree to transact. The buye because they think it’s a smart investment at the current price, and sell because they think it’s fully priced or overpriced there. What do about the accuracy of those views? Theoretical—The efficient market hypothesis states that all availa information is incorporated into prices“efficiently,” so that the assetsare fair and investors can’t “beat the market” by choosing them. Logical—What we’re talking about is the ability to make those judgments better than the average investor and thus achieve above average performance. Yet the one thing we know for sure is average, all investors are average. Thus logic tells us they can’t above-average judgments. Empirical—Performance studies show that very few investors are consistentlymore right than othersabout those judgments. Most investors do worsethan the markets, especially after the subtraction transaction costs, management fees and expenses. That’s the reason the rising popularity of passive index investing. That’s not to say no one beats the market. Lots of people but usually no more than would be the case under an assumption randomness. A few do it more consistentlythan randomnesswould and some of those become famous. The essential ingredient—superior into intrinsic value—is what gives them that ability. I call it “seco thinking”: the ability to think differently from the consensus and bette I’m not going to go any further regarding intrinsic value,the rel price to value,or second-level thinking, since they’re all covered The Most Important Thing. But the bottom line is that the super who’scapable of second-level thinking—is able to pick more outpe assetsthan underperformers, and thus to investmore in the former and the latter. The recipefor superior asset selection is that simple. And what is the hallmark of that superiority?Asymmetrical results. The investor who has no skill at selection has the same ratio of losersas the market. Thus he does well when the market does well,

poorly when it does poorly: An investor with negative skill at selection picks proportionally mo than winners and thus does worsethan the market, both when it goes when it goes down, as shown below. In other words, his distribution is shifted to the left of the market’s: But the skillful selector has a better ratio of winners to los market; he is able to investmore in his winners than his loser winners are more successful than his losersare unsuccessful.

The holdings of a habitually aggressive investor who is capab superior selection will go up more than the market when the up and may go down more than the market when it goes down. margin of superiority on the upside will exceed his degree on the downside, as it comes from his ability to select upside potential without entailing commensurate downside risk. result he’ll do better than the market when it goes up, but not when the market goes down as his aggressiveness would sugge an example of the asymmetry that marksthe superior investor: Likewise, the habitually defensive investor with superior selection will do better than the market when it goes down, but his selection will keep him from underperforming in rising markets to full extentthat his defensiveness alone would suggest. His skill selection enables him to find defensive assetsthat have upside participation that is disproportionate to their downside risk. It an asymmetrical distribution as well:

Both of the investors with superior selection skill—the aggressive on the defensive one—exhibit asymmetry relative to the market. That both have performance distributions that are biased favorably. Both upside potential that is disproportional to their downside risk (altho different ways). That’s how alpha in asset selection manifests itself Finally, the investor who is neither habitually aggressive nor ha defensive—but who possesses skill at both cycle positioning and asset selection—correctly adjusts market exposure at the right time and asymmetrical performance that comes from a better-than-average winners to losers. This is the best of all worlds: Almost anyone can make money when the market rises and los when it falls, and almost anyone can have the same ratio of winn

as the market overall. It takes superior skill to improve in produce the asymmetry that marksthe superior investor. Please note that in this discussion I have separated skill at cy from skill at asset selection. This bifurcation is somewhat artificial. I describe the two elements that influence performance, but many great investors have both, and most of the rest have neither. Investors who capable of both have a better sense for the market’s likely tendency put together portfolios that are better suitedfor the market environmen likely lies aheadin terms of the ratio of winners to losers. That them great . . . and rare. ∾ My epiphany in India taught me that successfullypositioning a portf the market movements that lie aheadis dependent on what you do aggressive or defensive) and when you do it (based on a super understanding of what cycles implyfor futuremarket moves). It’s this book to help in those regards.