XV LIMITS ON COPING In my opinion it’s entirely reasonable to try to improve lo investment results by altering positions on the basis of an understanding of the market cycle.But it’s essential that you a understand the limitations, as well as the skills that are required a how difficult it is. I undertook to write this book to give myself an opportunity to what I know about cycles, and because I enjoy writing, but main above—to help the reader deal with the market’s ups and downs. In the preceding pages, I have covered many of the consider on the process of understanding cycles, as well as the vaga restrain the confidence anyone should have regarding his ability goal here is to repeatthese considerations and sum up. Investing, as I’ve said, consists of positioning capital so as to futureevents. I also said we never know what the futureholds,and thus wherewe’re going. But we should do all we can to know wher since the current position of the cycle has powerful implications should cope with its possible future. Where we stand in cycles has a profound influence on the tendencies: on what is likely to happen, and perhaps even when.As discussed in chapter I and illustrated in the last chapter, our shifts the probability distribution governing the future. Manythingscan happen. We know we face uncertainty and risk. All we can know about the future—at best—is what the probabilities are. Know the probabilities can help us be more right than otherson average. essential to remember that knowing the probabilities is far from knowing precisely what’s going to happen. We generally have no choice but to be content with knowing probabilities. But the sample in terms of each outcome (e.g., each growth or each stock’s gain next year) will often be limited to —oneexperience—meaning many thingscan happen but only one will. Ther

won’tbe enough observations to allow us to assume that the be the one the probabilities say is most likely . . . and most likely thing will happen any time soon. For example, let’s take the correction of a euphoria-driven bubble. Theoretically, it doesn’t have to happen ever. But the realities that (a) it will happen eventually and (b) the more time that passe happening—and the longer the cycle continues to move upward—the likely (and usually the more imminent) the expected correction becomes. Of course, the more time that passes before this logical ev the further that the cycle swings in the upward direction—the will conclude that the rules of cycles have been somehow suspended the called-for correction will never happen. This can lead to the kind buying we saw in 2000, and eventually to an extremely painful We have to safeguard our portfolios (and our investment management businesses) against the danger stemming from the fact that the thing most likely to happen—which our understanding of cycles can tell not happen until long after it first becomes likely. And we have ourselves emotionallyso as to be able to live through the poten lag between reaching a well-reasoned conclusion and having it correct. ∾ How about a review of history? In the mid-1990s, the galloping rocketing tech sectorpresented an opportunity for conservative investors conclude that stocks were highly overvalued. The reasoning mighthave solid—based on an effective interpretation of the relevant data— for caution may have been strong. However, it would have taken market to prove those investors right, and as one of the most impo investment adages says, “Being too far aheadof your time is indis from being wrong.” The fact that their conclusions were well-founded woul have done the investors only limited good; before the correction of finally set in, they mighthave lost much of the capital under their management. However, the keen intellect that had led those investors to their conclusions, combined with sufficient conviction, should have allowed to stick to their guns. Hopefully they would have remained cautious than capitulate and buy in higher. If so, they would have been few years later and recovered their reputations and their assets. But the interim they lived through certainly would have been painful. Fast-forward to the current decade and the chance for mo Cautious investors have been provided another chance to conclude stocks are overheated, reduce holdings, and thus miss out on more

gains.Clients mighthave bailedagain,and cautious firms’assetscould have shrunk (in a rising market). Is caution appropriate again? Will it be proved appropriate by events? Will a correction come soon enough for cautious investors the benefits of being right?Will they be viewed as perma-bears are validated every once in a while by downturns? Or as brilliant who are right in principle but so far thwarted by the undependab and effect in the investment world? Thesequestions are largely unan But the most important thing is for the reader to note this key positioning for cycles isn’t easy. ∾ In my opinion it’s entirely reasonable to try to improve longresults by altering positions on the basis of an understanding cycle.But it’s essential that you also understand the limitations, as well skills that are required and how difficult it is. Importantly, I want to call attention to the obvious fact tha the everyday ups and downs of the market—the clear examples in chapter XII all concerned “once-in-a-lifetime” cyclical extremes these days seem to happen about once a decade). First, the extremes and crash—and,in particular, the process through whichthey arise—mos clearly illustrate the cycle in actionand how to respond to it. when dealing with pronounced extremes that we should expect the likelihood of success. Here’s how I think about the impact of market movements on investment environment we work in. It’s admittedly a simplistic visio suggests a worldthat is discernable and much more regular than the But it has worked for me for decades as a general fram heck out of tryingto understand the worldas a series of irregular, and zags:

Between the extremes of “rich”and “cheap”—when the cycle is in middle ground of “fair”—the state of the relationship between price is, by definition, nowhere as clear-cut as at the extremes. As It’s hard to make frequent distinctions and hard to do so correc Thus distinctions in the middle ground aren’tas potentially profita at the extremes, and those distinctions can’t be expected to work dependably. Detecting and exploiting the extremes is really the best we can ho And I believe it can be done dependably—if you’re analytical, experienced(or well-versed in history) and unemotional. That means, however, that you shouldn’t expect to reach profitable conclusions daily monthly or even yearly. We can’t creategreat opportunities to time the market through ou understanding of cycles. Rather, the market will decide when them. Remember, when there’s nothing cleverto do, the mistake lies to be clever. The reasonableness of the effort at cycle timing depends simply you expect of it. If you frequently try to discern wherewe the sense of “what’s going to happen tomorrow?”or “what’s in next month?” you’re unlikely to find success. I describe such “trying to be cute.”No one can make fine distinctions like those often or consistentlyright enough to add materially to investment results. one knows when the market developments that efforts at cycle label “probable” will materialize.

On the other hand, positioning portfolios for the majorcycles has be big contributor to Oaktree’s success. My colleagues and I became in 1990–93, 2002 and 2008, and we turned cautious and pulled 1994–95 and 2005–06, and to some extentin the last few years.We to use the cycle to our advantage and to add value for our clien we got the positioning largely right on those occasions. Also, there were any majoropportunities to do so that we missed. So thus far our majorcycle calls have all proved correct. The wo makes it soundlike this is a battle that’s consistentlywinnable. But personal “all” consists of four or five times in 48 years.By maki only at the greatest cyclical extremes, I’ve maximized my chances right. No one—and certainly not I—can succeed regularly, other than at extremes. So please note—as I always try to remind people—that don’t want to give the impression that readers should expect to be disappointed when they don’t.As I said in “On the Couch” 2016): I want to make it abundantly clear that when I call for caution 2006–07, or activebuying in late 2008, or renewed caution in or a somewhat more aggressive stance here in early 2016, I d considerable uncertainty. My conclusions are the result of my reasoning, applied with the benefit of my experience (and collaboration with my Oaktree colleagues),but I never consider th 100%likely to be correct, or even 80%. I think they’re right, o course, but I always make my recommendations with trepidation. I read the same newspapers as everyone else. I see the same economic data. I’m buffeted by the same market movements.The same factors appeal to my emotions. Maybe I’m a little m confident in my reasoning, and certainly I have more experience th most. But the key is that—for whatever reason—I’m able to s to my emotions and follow my conclusions. None of my c can be documentedor proved. If they could be, most intelligent people would reach the same conclusions, with the same degree confidence. I tell you this only to communicate my feeling th should fear he’s not up to the task just because he’s unsure conclusions. Thesearen’tthingsabout whichcertainty is attainable. Peter Bernstein contributed some usefulwisdom on this subject. I’ll conclude this chapter with his thoughts:

After 28 years at this post, and 22 years before this in money management, I can sum up whatever wisdom I have accumu way: The trick is not to be the hottest stock-picker, the w forecaster, or the developer of the neatest model; such victorie transient. The trick is to survive! Performing that trick requires a strong stomach for being wrong because we are all going to more often then we expect. The futureis not ours to know. B helps to know that being wrong is inevitable and normal, not s terrible tragedy, not some awful failing in reasoning, not even b luck in most instances. Beingwrong comes with the franchise o activity whose outcome depends on an unknown future. . “Being Wrong and Still Making Money,” Seeking Alpha, M 2017, emphasis added)