XVI THE CYCLE IN SUCCESS The important lesson is that—especially in an interconnected, informed world—everything that produces unusual profitabilitywill attract incremental capital until it becomes overcrowded and f institutionalized, at whichpoint its prospective risk-adjusted return will move toward the mean (or worse). And, correspondingly, thingsthat perform poorly for a while eventually will become so cheap—dueto their relative depreciation and the lack of investor interest—that they’ll be primed to outperform. Cycles like these hold the key to success in investin trees that everyone is assuming will grow to the sky. Hopefully you’re now equipped for the task of recognizing, responding to cycles. That can contribute substantially to your inves success. But as Peter Bernstein said, even the best investors won’tbe successful all the time. Understanding that is an important part of to live with the effort. Success, like the other thingsmentioned in comes and goes. In fact, over the course of my career, I’ve detected a cy large degree, the ebb and flow of success—like the other cycles described—stems from the role played by human nature. And, once each development in the cycle leads to the next. I’ve long held the I mentioned back on page 34—and it’s been strongly reinforced over years of involvement with distressed debt and distressed companies—that “success carries within itself the seeds of failure, and failure success.” Peter Kaufman, Charlie Munger’s biographer and the CEO of Glenair, exceptional producer of aerospace components, describes the workings dialectical materialism as follows: “As any system growstoward its maximum or peak efficiency, it will develop the very internal contr and weaknesses that bring about its eventual decayand demise” (his essay

#49: “The Perpetual See-Saw,” 2010). This captures the process that guarantees that success will prove cyclical. The Role of Human Nature Another way I put it is that “success isn’t good for most peop success can change people, and usually not for the better. people think they’re smart. That’s fine as far as it goes, negative ramifications. Success also tends to make people richer, lead to a reduction in their level of motivation. In investing there’s a complex relationship between humility an confidence. Since the greatest bargains are usually foundamong thing are undiscovered or disrespected, to be successful an investor enough confidence in his judgment to adopt what DavidSwensen, the successful head of Yale’s high-performing endowment,describes as “uncomfortably idiosyncratic portfolios, whichfrequently appear downright imprudent in the eyes of conventional wisdom” (PioneeringPortfolio Management, 2000). By definition, pronounced bargain pricesare most to be foundamong thingsthat conventional wisdom dismisses, that most investors uncomfortable, and whose merits are hard to comp Investing in them requires considerable inner strength. Whenone of those positions initially fails to rise as the investor or perhaps goes in the opposite direction—the investor has to confidence to hold on to his position or even add to it. He decline as a sure “sell” signal; in other words, it can’t be that the market knows more than he does. But, on the other hand, the investor also has to know his limitatio assume he’s infallible. He has to understand that no one knows the macro futureholds.Whilehe’s likely to have opinions regarding the futurecourse of economies, markets and interest rates, he should acknowledge that they’re not necessarily correct. And, counter to he mustn’t always assume that he’s right and the market’s wron hold or add without limitation and without rechecking his facts and reasoning. That’s hubris. As successes accrue, it’s common for people to conclude tha And after making a lot of money in a strongly rising mark they’ve got investing mastered. Their faith increases in their own opini and instinct. Their investing comes to reflect less self-doubt, mean think less about the possibility of being wrong and worryless about the of loss. This can cause them to no longer insist on the full marg

that gave rise to their earlier successes. This is the reason for and most important investment adages: “don’t confuse brainswith a market.” The plain truth is, there’s little of value to be learned from su who are successful run the risk of overlookingthe fact that they were or that they had help from others. In investing, success teaches making money is easy, and that they don’t have to worryabout risk— particularly dangerous lessons. They may conclude that the small opportunity that gave them their big winner is infinitely scalable, whichmost are not. And many people— including investors who became famous for having had a singl conclude that they can branch out into any number of other fields intelligence that produced that first epic success must be broadly appli Factors like these make investment success hard to replicate, meaning can prove cyclical ratherthan serial.In fact, ratherthan implythat another coming, one success may in and of itself make a second one quote Henry Kaufman, formerly Salomon Brothers’ chief economist: “The are two kinds of people who lose a lot of money: those who those who know everything” (“Archimedes on Wall Street,” Forbes, Octo 19, 1998). It’s not for nothing that there are famous jinxes, such as sh cover of Sports Illustrated or Forbes magazine. A cover appearance the result of a singular accomplishment that may have resulted from break, a unique, non-replicable opportunity,or the bearing of Or the good outcomes that land people on a magazine cover—inc successful investors lauded by Forbes—may cause them to become confident and cocksure, and less disciplined and hardworking . . a formula for success. The Role of Popularity One of the principal ways in whichsuccess carries the seeds of failure is through increased popularity. I wrote just before that most often foundamong those thingsthat are hard to comprehend, uncomfortable and easilydismissed by the crowd. Short-term investment performance is largely a popularity contest, and most bargains simple reason that they haven’t yet been taken up by the herd popular. On the contrary, assetsthat have performed well are usually that have gained in popularity because of their obvious merit and become high-priced.

Let’s think about investment strategies. It’s essential to grasp that nothing will work forever: no approach, rule or process can outperform all First, most securities and approaches are right for certain environments parts of the cycle,and wrong for others. And second, past succe itself render futuresuccess less likely. In the 1960s, when the idea of investing in stocks was fir popularity among Americans, the emphasis was on industry leaders called“blue-chip” securities. Small-capitalization stocks were largely overlooked at first, but eventually they were noticed and bought. This them to do better than large-caps. Whenpeople noticed small-cap stock superior returns in this “catch-up” phase, their buying produced for them . . . until it caused them to be fully priced that point, interest rotated to large-caps, whichthen regained the lead. Likewise, growth and tech stocks did far better than more-mundane stocks in the late 1990s. This divergence reached a maximum growth stocks outperforming value stocks that year by almost points. But growth stocks’ dramatic outperformance rendered them overpriced, and when the stock market corrected in 2000–02, they lost more than value stocks, whichpreviously had languished cheap. In other words, “outperformance” is just another word for one thi appreciating relative to another. And, clearly, that can’t go on Regardless of how great its merits may be, “a” is unlikely to more valuable than “b.” That means if “a” keeps appreciating relati there has to be a point at whichit will become overvalued relati just when the last person gives up on “b” because it’s been perfo poorly and jumpsto “a,” it will be time for “b” (now compelling relative to “a”) to outperform. Strong forcescreatea tendency for strategies, investors or investme management firms that succeed for a while to cease doing so. I abovethat most ideas aren’tinfinitely scalable. One essential truth about investing is that, generally speaking, good results will bring more mone “hot” money managers and strategies, and if allowed to grow unch more money will bring bad performance. In the mid-2000s, convertible arbitrage rapidly gained in popularit Investors without a view on the prospects for a given stock were buy bondsconvertible into it, as long as they were able to short the shares in an appropriate “hedge ratio” (see my memo “A Case 2005). Convertible arbitrageursreported outstanding risk-adjusted returns all kinds of market environments . . . until so much mone competitors were attracted to the strategy that no one could find posit attractively priced as those of the past.

The important lesson is that—especially in an interconnected, inf world—everything that produces unusual profitabilitywill attract incre capital until it becomes overcrowded and fully institutionalized, at point its prospective risk-adjusted returnwill move toward the mean (or worse). And, correspondingly, thingsthat perform poorly for a while eventual will become so cheap—dueto their relative depreciation and the investor interest—that they’ll be primed to outperform. Cycles the key to success in investing, not trees that everyone is assum to the sky. It’s all a matter of ebb and flow. In investing, thingswork un Or as Ajit Jain of Berkshire Hathaway told me about investing the “it’s easy until it isn’t.” Cheap small-caps outperform until they reach the point wherethey’re longer cheap. Trend-following or momentum investing—staying with the winners— worksfor a while. But eventually rotation and buying the over as the winning strategy. “Buying the dips” lets investors take advantage of momentary weakn up until the time when a majorproblem surfaces (or the marke no longer recovers), causing price declines to be followed price declines, not quick rebounds. Riskyassetsoutperform—coming from valuations wherethey were excessively penalized for their riskiness—until they’re priced more safe assets. Then they underperform until they once again offer adequ risk premiums. The bottom line is clear: nothing worksforever. But it’s essential recognize that when everyone becomes convinced that something will keep working forever, that’s the very time when it’ll become certain not “In investing, everything that’s important is counter-intuitive, and everything that’s obvious to everyone is wrong.” Perhaps the greatest example of the influence of popularity (in seen in 1979, and few investors who were around at the time have it. On August 13 of that year, after almost a decade of performance on the part of stocks, Business Week magazine publi story entitled “The Deathof Equities.” Its conclusion—that stocks were for—was based on the opposite of everything recommended in this The article cited a litany of reasons why the poor performance would continue unabated:

Sevenmillion people had given up on investing in stocks. Manyother formsof investment had done better. Pension funds were turning to “hard assets” like gold. Inflation had sapped corporations’ ability to increase profits It went on: Even institutions that have so far remained in the financial market are pouring money into short-term investmentsand such “alternate equity” investmentsas mortgage-backed paper, foreign securities, venture capital, leases, guaranteed insurance contracts, indexed b stock options, and futures. And here was its conclusion: Today, the old attitude of buying solid stocks as a c one’s life savings and retirement has simply disappeared. Says a young U.S. executive: “Have you been to an American stockho meeting lately? They’re all old fogies. The stock market is wherethe action’s at.” In short, what “The Deathof Equities” said was that stocks had be unpopular that they would never do well again.It takes a highly first-level thinker to conclude that poor past performance has led unpopularity today, whichimplies poor performance tomorrow. Rath insightful second-level thinker says poor past performance has led unpopularity today, whichimplies low pricestoday, whichin turn good performance tomorrow. “The Deathof Equities” was published just a few years before—and essence laid out the entire case for—the 1982 kickoff of the great market in history. At the time it was published, the S&P 500 in March of 2000 it reached 1527. That’s a price gain of or 13.7% per year for almost 21 years (and those figures ignor whichtook the total gain to more than 28 times and the annualized total to 17.6%). The lesson is simple: investors should be leery Rather, it’s unpopularity that is the buyer’s friend. The Role of Companies

Companies, too, are subject to ups and downs in terms of succe on a series of cause-and-effect events. One of the most pronounced processes I’ve witnessed took place at Xerox. The office-copying giant—the first to make it possible to avoid the process of photostatting, whichrequired that documents be sent out lab to be duplicated—was one of the first companies I visited office-equipment analyst in the late 1960s. At that time, Xerox monopoly on “dry” copying and appeared to be in full command destiny. My senioranalyst and I used to meet with Xerox’s “anal and for each copier model in the product line he would the company’s projections in terms of the number of machines it in the field in the coming year and the annual rental revenue Because of Xerox’s dominant market position, it was largely those projections come true. It could charge monopolistic pricesthat enab it to fine-tune the size of its rental fleet and that gave it very margins. It also insisted on a rental-only model, refusing to machines and lose control of them. What a perpetual motion mach But Xerox management may have ignored the possibility that tho margins would prove unsustainable. In 1975, Xerox resolved an complaint over control of the copier market by entering into requiring it to make its powerful portfolio of patents available Competitors beganto produce and sell their own copiers. They were undercut Xerox’s pricesand displace part of its rental population. This reduced Xerox’s U.S. market share in copiers from nearly 100% teens, and it ate significantly into Xerox’s profits. As the incum had trouble responding to the price competition, as this would existing business. The competitors did so in an early example of calleddisruption. In 1968, thanks to its monopolistic position, strong growth profitability, Xerox was a leaderof the Nifty Fifty I described companies that were considered so strong and so fast growing that bad could happen” and “no stock price was too high.” But trees rarely the sky, and success is rarelyunending. Because Xerox’s behavior had invited competitionthat it was un to respond to—and for other reasons as well—by the early years century it was experiencing serious difficulty. Companies, like people, have the potential to respond to success behavior that dooms that very success. Thus companies can: get complacent and become “fat and happy,” become bureaucratic and slow-moving, fail to take actionto defend their positions,

cease to be innovative and non-conforming, and join the crowd mediocrity, and/or conclude that they can do prettymuch anything, and thus venture areas beyond their competence. In these ways and more, success truly carries the seeds of failure. good news—as I said earlier—is that failure also carries the seeds Once under attack, companies can regain their motivation and sense purpose. They can shed bureaucratic fat and get serious about meeting competitionand making money. And in the ultimate form of unsuccess, they can go through slim down, and shed losingbusiness lines, unprofitablelocations, onerous contracts and burdensomedebt. (Of course, however, the owners of companies that go into bankruptcy usually lose their positions.) Thus Jahan Janjigian wrote about Xerox in 2002: [In 2000,] a new management team implemented a number restructuring initiatives aimedat returning the company to profitability. Theseincluded aggressive cost cuts and the elimination of 13,600 positions. Xerox also sold off its Chinese and H operations, as well as 50% of Fuji Xerox to Fuji PhotoFilm. Furthermore, Xerox allowed GE Capital to take over the f receivables, for whichit already has received $2.7 billion. And X has exitedthe struggling small-officeand home-officebusiness. In April,Xerox agreed to pay $10 million to settle the year investigation. It later restated all of its past financial r required under the agreement. Additionally, the company was successful in working with creditors in renegotiating its debt obligations to more manageable terms. Perhaps most important, the company’s products are now more competitive in terms of price and quality. Due to the success of these efforts, Xerox returned to sooner than expected. . . . Givensignificant operational improvements, we think Xerox makes for a compelling buy a levels. (“Xerox Back from the Brink,” Forbes Growth Investo October 2002)

Because companies don’t last as long as economies and markets do long-term cycle in company success may not take as long either. their lifetimes, companies’ gains can lead to losses, and lossescan lay groundworkfor gains.Thereis a cycle in business success. The Role of Timing Among the factors that can contribute greatly to an individual’ company’s success is timing. Among other things, it helps to thingsat an above-average time. That’s what put Xerox on the 1960s, and it helped me out as well. In August 1978, shortly after shifting from running Citibank’s eq research department to managing bond portfolios, I got the phonecall changed my life. “There’s a guy named Milken in California,” “and he’s involved in something calledhigh yield bonds. A client want portfolio of those bonds. Can you figureout what that means?” It was just in 1977 or 1978 that high yield bond investing had its institutionalinception. That’s when Michael Milken achieved his first in convincing investors that it’s okay for below-investment grade companies to issue bonds—andfor institutions to buy them—if the interest rate enough to compensate for the risk. The high yield universe consisted than $3 billion of bondsat the time I first got involved. The investing organizations had a rule against buying bondsrated below investment grade, whichwere commonly called“junk bonds.” And Moody’s categorically rejected B-rated bonds, saying they “fail to posse characteristics of a desirable investment.” How could these unpopular bondsnot have been underrated bargains? How could early participation not have been a boon? And then, a decade later, BruceKarshbrought his legal skills and str insight to my team, complementing Sheldon Stone’s expertise in we organized one of the first distressed debt funds from a majorfinan institution. What could be more risky and thus more unseemly than investing in the debt of companies in bankruptcy or considered destined for idea could people be more averse? In other words, whereelse could money be made so safely? In both these instances and more, I’ve been lucky to come across ass classes when they were still undiscovered, uncrowded and thus bargainpriced. There’s little that can make investing as easy as having largely to oneself. It beats the heck out of tryingto wringdecen a market that everybody has discovered, figured out, taken to and

into. The latter is far from a formula for success. The latecomer crowded field isn’t “the wise man in the beginning”; rather, he’s more likely to be “the fool in the end.” Thoseof us who’ve been lucky early ratherthan late know—or certainly should know—that our success wasn’t all our doing. The times have to cooperate. And that brings me to a great observation from Henry Phipps, celebrated partner of Andrew Carnegie and Henry Clay Frick,two century’s greatest businessmen. In 1899, Phipps wrote as follows: Good times like the present, make bad times;a law sure as the s of the pendulum. We have experience to know these elementary truths. Have we the sense to put them into practice? (George H Henry Clay Frick: The Man, 2002) As with people—whose successes may constitute isolated instances rat than indicators of great thingsto come as they mightbe wont to belie times may not remain conducive to continued success. Good times can encourage investment decisions that depend on the perpetuation of in order to succeed. But those good times can lead instead to bad test the decisions in ways they can’t withstand. Not only are good times followed sooner or later by bad times,bu with so many other examples of cycles—good times often produce bad Good times can lead to unwise debt issuance (as we saw in the the distressed debt cycle)or to overbuilding (as we saw in the the real estate cycle). Likewise as Ruchir Sharma, chief global strategist at Morgan Investment Management, wrote in his book The Rise and Fall of Natio regarding the effect of fresh new reformers, “Reform leads to growth good times,and good times encourage an arrogance and complacency that leads to a new crisis.” Phipps pointed out that history shows these trendsclearly. Th question is whether we are astuteand unemotional enough to times don’t necessarily lead to further good times,and thus that success can be cyclical. Let’s returnto Charlie Munger’s quote from Demosthenes: “For that wh a man wishes, that he will believe.” In other words, wishful takes hold. This can cause investors to believe that good times will be followed by more good times.But that ignores the cyclical nature and especially of success.