XVII THE FUTURE OF CYCLES The tendency of people to go to excess will never end. A since those excesses eventually have to correct, neither will the occurrence of cycles. Economies and markets have never moved in straight line in the past, and neither will they do so in th that means investors with the ability to understand cycles w opportunities for profit. Thus far I’ve covered a lot of the past and a bit of t conclude, I want to turn to the future. Over the course of my career, I’ve witnessed numerous occasion pundits said the occurrence of one type of cycle or another had end. Whether because of economic vitality, financial innovation, astut corporate management, or the supposed omniscience of central heads of Treasury, they observed that the fluctuations of either the econ cycle or the cycle in profits would be seen no more. I spent some time on this subject in “Will It Be Different Th (November 1996). First I described a newspaper article that had few days earlier: It recounted the case currently being made for this remaining a continuous, recession-free economic expansion. As its lead paragraph says: From boardroomsto livingrooms and from government offices to trading floors, a new consensus is emerging big, bad business cycle has been tamed. The current expansion, at 67 months, has already far exceed post-war average. Nevertheless, 51 of the 53 “top economists” surveyed by Blue Chip newsletter (my favorite experts and the s of my July 1996 memo, “The Valueof Predictions II”) predict g

next year of 1.5% or more. And the University of Michigan survey finds that among consumers, more expect five more good years than expect bad times to emerge. The Chairman of Sears states “There is no natural law that have to have a recession.” According to Amoco’s Chairman, “I d see any reason to believe [the recovery] can’t go on until th the century.” Sara Lee’s CEO says “I don’t know what could happen to make a cyclical downturn.” (“TheBusiness Cycleis Tamed, M Say, Alarming Others,” Wall StreetJournal, November 15, 1996) Clearly these statements, made in 1996, did not truly mark the end of cycles. Rather, there was a modest recession in 2001 and then, years later, the Great Recession of 2008–09, the most powerful cyclical ever experiencedby most people alive today. I went on in “Will It Be Different This Time?” to quote a assertions from other respected leaders: “There will be no interruption of our present prosperity.” “I cannot help but raise a dissenting voice to the statements prosperity in this country must necessarily diminish and recede in future.” “We are only at the beginning of a period that will go history as the golden age.” “The fundamental business of the country . . . is prosperous basis.” In assessing the reasonableness of these statements, it’s important to that they were made,respectively, by the president of the Pierce-Arro Car Company, the president of the New York Stock Exchange, the presi of the Bush Terminal Company, and the president of the United positions of the first and third should serve as a giveaway that statements came in the distant past, even without your knowing that president in question was Herbert Hoover. The timing of these 1928 and 1929—on the doorstep of the Great Depression that plagued worldfor more than a decade—was less than auspicious. So much, for prosperity without slowdowns, and for the end of cyclicality. But then, in the 2000s, the expectation of “permanent prosperity” rea head again.Whilenot specifically arguing that there would be no more cycles, a lot of investors, bankers and members of the medi embraced the belief that risk was gone—essentially the same thing. In his autobiography, StressTest, former Treasury secretary Tim Ge describes the climate when he arrived at the Fed in 2003:

Economists were starting to debate whether America’s long stretch stability constituted a new normal, a Great Moderation,a quasipermanent era of resilience to shocks. Therewas growing confide that derivatives and other financial innovations designed to hedgeand distribute risk—along with better monetary policy to respond to downturns and better technology to smooth out inventory cycles—had made devastating crises a thing of the past. The fact that this purportedly permanent prosperity was given a name lik “the Great Moderation” suggests it had entered the popular consc And thus it met my requirementfor the riskiest possible environmen whichthere’s widespread belief that there’s no risk. On page 120, I the mediaaccounts to that effect that enumerated the forcesthat had cause risk’s elimination:Fed omniscience, unremitting demand for securities from cash-flow-rich nations, and the latest inventions from Wall Street. Not only were all these “cycles are over” proclamations wrong, bu very much worthnoting that each of them coincided with—and certainly contributed to—the upward march to a cyclical high. And that followed those highs would be unusually painful: the Great Depression 1929–39, a three-year stock market decline in 2000–02 (the first since 1929)and the Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08. In “Will It Be Different This Time?” I went on from recalling Pollyanna statements just cited to drawing what I think are the essen conclusions on this subject: Of course, what these observations signaled wasn’t that cycles wouldn’t repeat, but ratherthat the onlookers had grown too confident. Cycles in economies, companies and markets will continu to occur at least as long as people are involved in making decisions—which I believe means forever. . . . Thereis a right time to argue that thingswill be that’s when the market is on its backside and everyone else is thingsat giveaway prices. It’s dangerous when the market’s at r levelsto reach for a positive rationalization that has never held tr the past. But it’s been done before, and it’ll be done again. “It’s different this time” are four of the most dangerous wordsin the business world—especiallywhen applied, as is often the case, to some that has reached what in prior times would have been calledan extre Whenpeople say “it’s different” in this case, what they often mean is the rules and processes that produced cycles in the past have been

But the cyclical behavior of the financial past did not result from operation of physical or scientific rules. In science, cause and effec dependable and repeatable relationship, so that it’s possible to say confidence, “if a, then b.” But while there are some principles that opera the worldof finance and business, the resulting truth is very diffe that in science. The reason for this—as I’ve harped on repeatedly—is the inv people. People’s decisions have great influence on economic, business market cycles. In fact, economies, business and markets consist transactionsbetween people. And people don’t make their decisions scientifically. Some take history, facts and data into account, and some approach the decisions as “economic men.”But even the most unemotional and stoic among them are subject to human influences and the loss of Richard Feynman, the noted physicist, wrote, “Imagine how much ha physics would be if electrons had feelings!” That is, if elect they couldn’t be counted on to always do what science expe rules of physics would work only some of the time. The point is that people do have feelings, and as such they are inviolable laws. They’ll always bring emotions and foibles to their and investing decisions. As a result, they’ll become euphoric time and despondent at the wrong time—exaggerating the upside when thingsare going well and the downside risk when thingsare going poorly—and thus they’ll take trendsto cyclical extremes. A few paragraphs from The Most Important Thingprovide a good foundation for a recap of the main pointsregarding cycles’ persistence The basic reason for the cyclicality in our worldis the involve humans. Mechanical thingscan go in a straight line. Time moves aheadcontinuously. So can a machine when it’s adequately powere But processes in fields like history and economics involve people, when people are involved, the results are variable and cyclica main reason for this, I think, is that people are emotional a inconsistent, not steady and clinical. Objective factors do play a part in cycles, of course—fa quantitative relationships, worldevents, environmental changes, technological developments and corporate decisions. But it’s the application of psychology to these thingsthat causes investors to overreact or underreact, and thus determines the amplitude of the cyclical fluctuations. Whenpeople feel good about the way thingsare going and optimistic about the future, their behavior is strongly impacted. T

spendmore and save less. They borrow to increase their enjoyment o their profit potential, even though doing so makes their financial position more precarious (of course, concepts like precariousness a forgotten in optimistic times). And they become willing to p for current value or a piece of the future. Investors tend to look at the processes that are afoot, attribute me dependability to them, rely on that dependability, and extrapolate the processes. What they overlook is the role of emotions: greed on the and fear on the downswing. Emotions operate on cycles two ways:they magnify the forcestha extremes that eventually require correction, and they cause market participants to overlook the cyclicality of cyclical thingsat just those moments when recognition of excesses is most essential and most poten profitable: stage three of the bull and bear markets described on page 192 and 193–194. The following passage from The Most Important Thingmay serve to wr up regarding the outlook for cycles’ recurrence: Cycles will never stop occurring. If there were such a thing as a completely efficient market, and if people really made decisions in calculating and unemotional manner, perhaps cycles (or at le extremes) would be banished. But that’llnever be the case. Economies will wax and wane as consumers spendmore or less, responding emotionallyto economic factors or exogenous events, geopolitical or naturally occurring. Companies will anticipate a rosy futureduring the up cycle and thus over-expand facilities and inventories; these will become burdensomewhen the economy turns down. Providers of capital will be too generous when the e doing well, abetting over-expansion with cheapmoney, and then they’ll pull the reins too tight when thingscease to look as good. Investors will overvalue companies when they’re doing well and undervalue them when thingsget difficult. . . . Ignoring cycles and extrapolating trendsis one of the most dangerous thingsan investor can do. People often act as if c that are doing well will do well forever, and investmentsthat are outperforming will outperform forever, and vice versa.Instead, it’s the opposite that is more likely to be true. A deep understanding of emotions and the overdoing they lead to key bottom lines of this book. Cyclical deviations from the trendline produced largely by overdoing and its eventual correction. This is

true in the securities markets, whichare nothing but a collection making decisions (oftenin a herd-like manner) that they hope will profitable. But it is no less true of economies and companies; they like independent, well-oiled machines, but they, too, are nothing but people making decisions, with all that implies. The first time rookie investors see this phenomenon occur, it understandable that they mightaccept that something that has never happened before—thecessation of cycles—could happen. But the second time or the third time, those investors, now experienced, should realize it’s never going to happen, and turn that realizat their advantage. The next time you’re approached with a deal predicated on cycle having ceased to occur, remember that invariably it’s a lo (The Most Important Thing) I was 22 years old and a newcomer to investing in 1968, the initialexposure to the Nifty Fifty. People far more experiencedthan I held forth regarding the companies’ greatness, their boundless potential for growth, the fact that nothing bad could ever happen to them, and absence of any limits on their stock prices. I swallowed those storie rate I don’t remember pushing back on the illogicality of their extre Thus I was lucky to learn my first lessons regarding cyclicality, value at an early age and with relatively little bet on the erroneous conc I was a little less naive when I organized Citibank’s response to oil embargo of 1973, when the price of oil went from $20 a barre energy analysts saw few impediments to continued increases. And wonders of computers led to the formation of far more disc-drive in the 1980sthan would turn out to be needed. But later, with a few decades of experience under my belt, I wa recognize the excesses of the tech/Internet/e-commerce bubble of 1990s, and of the unquestioning capital market behavior that the Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08. This learning process regar excesses in the markets—and their contributionto cycles—is an indis part of every investor’s education. ∾ The tendency of people to go to excess will never end. And excesses eventually have to correct, neither will the occurrence of Economies and markets have never moved in a straight line in neither will they do so in the future. And that means inves to understand cycles will find opportunities for profit.