C H A P T E R 10
Conclusion
T
his book has a central theme: Successful trading is about developing
a consistent process. You must have a goal; you must ﬁnd trades with
edge; you must capture that edge; and you must size each trade in a
way that is consistent with your goal. Everything else you do must be done
within this framework.
Your goal must be clearly deﬁned and easily expressed. It must be one
thing. “I want to make as much money as possible, with minimal risk and
a steady income,” is not a goal. It is three goals. You need to focus, at least
initially, on one thing. Once you are clearly achieving that one thing you
can then add new goals, but if you do not clearly enunciate a goal you will
never achieve anything. And if you cannot explain it in one sentence, you
are probably not completely clear about what it is. Next, the other parts of
the trading strategy can be developed, always thinking about how they ﬁt
into the overall framework provided by the goal.
To make money we need an edge. Any successful trading methodology
must have a clear statistical edge. If you do not know exactly what your
edge is you should not trade. Here we have focused on the careful mea-
surement and forecasting of realized volatility, and we aim to trade when
this diverges signiﬁcantly from that implied by the options market. When-
ever this divergence exists you must understand why the options are priced
that way and why the market is mispricing the situation. Sometimes values
will be at historically unprecedented levels and they should be because the
current fundamental situation for that underlying is also historically un-
precedented.
175

176
VOLATILITY TRADING
In addition to the numerical evaluation of a potential trade, you should
be able to identify and evaluate the reason that implied volatility is priced
where it is. This is the point where it is necessary to be on top of recent
news stories, sector trends, and behavioral psychology.
Mispriced volatility can only be captured with an efﬁcient and effec-
tive hedging strategy. This transforms the options prices from directional
bets into a volatility trade. Hedging may superﬁcially look like trading
the underlying, but its goal is totally different. We are not trying to make
proﬁtable directional trades. We are trying to manage our volatility trade in
the cheapest possible way. Hedging makes volatility trading very path de-
pendent: It is quite possible to predict volatility correctly and lose money.
This dissonance between being correct and making money makes volatility
trading an inherently statistical business.
Trades need to be sized correctly. This means that each trade is evalu-
ated according to its projected return and risk, in the overall context of our
goals. The same trade will be sized differently by different traders, depend-
ing on whether they aim to maximize proﬁts or to achieve a certain speciﬁc
proﬁt goal each year. We don’t know how each trade will play out, but with
experience we can become increasingly conﬁdent of the statistical likeli-
hood of a trade being a winner. A well-thought-out sizing scheme can turn
a string of highly uncertain events (such as individual option trades) into a
consistently proﬁtable business.
However, in order to do this you must keep comprehensive, accurate
records. You absolutely must know the P/L proﬁle of all your trades. In
fact, if you don’t do this, there is really no way you can improve. How
can you improve if you don’t even know how well you are doing? Admit-
tedly, record keeping isn’t much fun, but having money is fun and keeping
records is essential to get it.
This process is necessary but, sadly, doing all of these things is not
sufﬁcient. When all things are equal, the trader with more knowledge will
do better, but all things are not equal. There are other things that are also
essential, and while I cannot really quantify their importance, it is entirely
possible that they are even more important than knowledge. What are these
things?
EXECUTION ABILITY
Execution ability is the skill that enables us to participate in the trades in
which we want to engage. In pit-traded products this could be related to
physical proximity to important brokers or even just being a nice guy. The
execution edge could also come from speed of technology, connections to
important customers, or the considerably less reliable method of reading

Conclusion
177
a broker, where a trader learns to guess the incoming order from certain
physical clues.
In many trading situations, execution ability is the single most impor-
tant skill to have. Many traders will have the same rough idea of value.
Those who are best at getting trades will be the ones who make money.
There are some unknowledgeable traders who are especially adept at trade
execution, which counteracts many of their other defects.
CONCENTRATION
Concentration is important in trading. Some people are just better at paying
attention than others.
Concentration in itself is not enough to turn a nonstudious trader into
a winner, but it could be a reason why someone who knows less than
you does better than you. Actually, it seems that the more knowledgeable
traders tend to be the most defective in concentration.
PRODUCT SELECTION
Product selection is probably the biggest factor in the success of an individ-
ual. Are you prepared to move to Singapore because things are busy there?
No? Well someone is. And he will get paid for that willingness. Would you
rather be a well-known ﬁgure in a complex product or an unknown in corn
options? It is common to see ego get in the way of smart, educated traders.
It is far better to be a trader in the sloppiest pit than to grind away in a
highly competitive business.
Understanding the pricing model, volatility, hedging, trade sizing, and
simple psychology is very important. Technical knowledge must be learned
simply because it can be learned. It won’t guarantee success, though, be-
cause there are other aspects that also need to be present to be successful.
Always remain aware that a model is not a strategy, and a strategy is not
a business. Further, be cognizant that a huge part of your success lies in
choosing good products to trade. Even the best trader will have a tough
time trading a product with little end-user interest, while many mediocre
traders have made money by trading busy products. Remember that the
aim is to make money, not to show what a great trader you are.
We also need to pay attention to seemingly mundane things like hav-
ing good execution software, hardware that is reliable, a comfortable of-
ﬁce, and getting enough sleep. However, knowledge is certainly a source
of edge. So, all else being equal, the trader with the greater knowledge will
be the more successful.
Good luck.

