A P P E N D I X B
Spreadsheet
Instructions
I
n all spreadsheets, user input is required in white cells. Yellow cells are
the result of calculations.
GARCH
This spreadsheet uses MLE and the solver add-in to estimate a GARCH(1,1)
model. It also shows the volatility term structure consistent with this
model. This sheet makes use of the Solver add-in so it is not protected.
r Go to ﬁnance.yahoo.com.
r Enter the ticker symbol in the “Get Quotes” box.
r Go to the “Historical Prices” link, which is third from the top in the box
“More on (ABC)” on the left of the page.
r Set the start date to be four years before the end date and click “Get
Prices.”
r Scroll to the bottom of the page and click on “Download to Spread-
sheet.” Choose the option “Open.”
r Cut and paste all of the data to the Yahoo! Finance data tab in
Garch.xls.
r Go to Data->Sort->By Date Ascending.
r Go to the GARCH(1,1) tab and make sure all the data at the lower range
is correct. Four calendar years can contain slightly different numbers
of trading days so some samples will be of different lengths. It is also
183

184
VOLATILITY TRADING
important to clear the Yahoo! data before reusing the sheet on a differ-
ent day.
r Go to Tools->Solver. The inputs should be set up to maximize cell G2
by varying cells C3 through C5 with the constraints C3 >= 0, C4 >= 0
and C6 <= 0. Run Solver.
r On the “Calendar Curve” tab, you can enter your best estimate of cur-
rent volatility in cell C7 and look at the calendar curve being implied
by the ﬁtted GARCH model.
VOLATILITY CONES AND SKEW AND
KURTOSIS CONES
These spreadsheets produce various volatility, skewness, and kurtosis
cones from historical data.
r Go to ﬁnance.yahoo.com.
r Enter the ticker symbol in the “Get Quotes” box.
r Go to the “Historical Prices” link, which is third from the top in the box
“More about (ABC)” on the left of the page.
r Set the start date to be four years before the end date and click on “Get
Prices.”
r Scroll to the bottom of the page and click “Download to Spreadsheet.”
Choose the option “Open.”
r Cut and paste all of the data to the Yahoo! Finance data tab in Volatility
Cones.xls or Skew and Kurtosis cones.xls.
DAILY OPTION HEDGING SIMULATION
Here we simulate the evolution of a hedged long option position of 1,000
vega (this can be changed in cell O18 on the historical returns sheet and
cell N18 on the normal returns sheet), where we hedge each day on the
close. We use the standard U.S. option convention where one option is for
100 shares. The tab “Normal Returns” generates a GBM process from the
parameters in cells N3 and N4. The tab “Historical Returns” uses historical
data. Here cell O4 is a derived quantity and cell O3 is set to zero. This is
consistent with our basic assumptions regarding measuring volatility from
historical time series.
r Go to ﬁnance.yahoo.com.
r Enter the ticker symbol in the “Get Quotes” box.

Spreadsheet Instructions
185
r Set the start date to be one year before the end date and click on “Get
Prices.” Check that this gives 250 days of data. Some adjustment will
be needed here (and clearly the sheet can be modiﬁed to deal with any
length of historical data).
r Scroll to the bottom of the page and click “Download to Spreadsheet.”
Choose the option “Open.”
r Cut and paste all of the data to the Yahoo! Finance data tab in
Garch.xls.
r Go to Data->Sort->By Date Ascending.
r In cell 013 (or N13 on the “Normal Returns” tab) enter the implied
volatility at which the option was purchased (the zero-sum nature of
derivatives trading means that the results for a short position are the
exact opposite of those for a long).
r The hedging volatility can be adjusted in cell O7 (N7 on the “Normal
Returns” tab).
r The “Normal Returns” sheet can be recalculated by hitting the F9 key.
TRADE EVALUATION
This sheet is a template for the post-trade evaluation process. Daily P/Ls
are entered in column C and haircuts in column H. The interest rate is
entered in cell E2.
TRADING GOALS
In this case we simulate the results of a strategy with a given expected P/L
and Sharpe ratio (cells C3 and C4). It plots 20 realizations of the process
over half a year. Clearly even very good traders can have very mediocre
results over the short term. Use the F9 key to recalculate.
CORRADO-SU SKEW CURVE
This sheet uses least squares and Solver to extract the implied volatility,
skewness, and kurtosis consistent with the Corrado-Su model, from the
quoted call option prices. This sheet makes use of the Solver add-in so it
is not protected. Set the parameters in cells C2 through C4. Set the lowest
strike in cell E3. Enter the call midmarket prices in cells H3 through H9.
Open Solver. It should be set to minimize cell J2 (the sum of the squares

186
VOLATILITY TRADING
of the differences of the market prices and the Corrado-Su prices) by
changing cells C5 through C7. The implied volatility curve as a function of
strike can be produced either by entering the implied volatilities directly
into cells F3 through F9 or by using Solver. For example, to obtain the
implied volatility of the 35 strike, use Solver to minimize the difference
between cells G3 and H3 by changing cell F3.
MEAN REVERSION SIMULATOR
Here we have a simulation for trading a mean-reverting process using the
rules in Chapter 6. The tab “‘Normal Noise’ simple” uses a modiﬁed rule
to enter a trade where the underlying is driven by an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
process with normally distributed innovations with a standard deviation of
one. The entry level is set by changing cell J3. A value of 2 means we enter
the trade when we deviate from fair value by two standard deviations. At
this point we commit half our available wealth. The position is held until
the asset returns to fair value. The tab “‘normal noise’ exact” scales our en-
try according to the optimal rule of equation (6.28). The fat-tailed tabs sim-
ulate the same trade but for the case where the noise is T-distributed. This
introduces excess kurtosis. The P/L curve generated in “‘fat-tailed’ noise
exact” shows that the scaling law of equation (6.28) is too aggressive for
this situation; however, simple rules can still be found (by adjusting cell Z3
in tab “‘fat-tailed’ noise simple”) that are proﬁtable.
