Resources
T
rading is often about making instant decisions, generally based on in-
complete information. This tends to put traders in a very now-oriented
mind-set and makes it difﬁcult to plan career advancement beyond
the next expiration. But markets, products, and technology change and we
have to continue to learn. The books and web sites listed here range from
those that are absolutely essential to those that I just happened to ﬁnd
thought-provoking.
ESSENTIAL BOOKS
Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives by John C. Hull (Prentice
Hall, 2005)
This is the standard introduction to derivatives. As such it should
be read by all salesmen, traders, and quantitative analysts. It has excel-
lent breadth of coverage and assumes very little previous knowledge.
We assume most of this material as a prerequisite.
The Complete Guide to Option Pricing Formulas by Espen Gaarder
Haug (McGraw-Hill, 1997)
This is the deﬁnitive resource of its kind. It contains the pricing
formulae for over 80 types of vanilla and exotic options together with
their Greeks. It also gives numerous approximate solutions and numer-
ical methods, and contains a CD with a number of spreadsheets and the
VBA code for all the equations. This book is an absolutely indispens-
able reference.
Option Market Making by Allen Jay Baird (John Wiley & Sons, 1992)
This is a wonderful book on how to be a ﬂoor trader. It is about
execution and risk management. It is not at all quantitative, and with
the lessening importance of ﬂoor trading it is becoming more limited
in application. Nonetheless it should be read by all option traders. This
would be the best book on market-making options even if it wasn’t the
only book on market-making options. The intended audience for this
187

188
RESOURCES
book, small option market makers, had to learn very robust, model-free
risk-management techniques, and Baird manages to write about these
in a way that is accessible to anyone in ﬁnance. I would ﬁnd it difﬁcult
to take someone seriously as an option trader if they had not read this
book.
The Mathematics of Money Management: Risk Analysis Techniques
for Traders by Ralph Vince (John Wiley & Sons, 1992)
This book introduces the trader to the ideas and calculations
needed for using the Kelly criterion. The author gets into a bit of a
frenzy attacking that Kelly is only applicable to trades with binary
outcomes, and some of the notation is a little idiosyncratic, but
most traders would beneﬁt considerably from reading this book and
working through some of the examples. The Kelly paradigm certainly
has problems but that is no excuse for not fully understanding it.
A Practical Guide to Forecasting Financial Market Volatility by Ser-
Huang Poon (John Wiley & Sons, 2005)
This is a solid review of the enormous academic literature. This is
a well-written summary that includes methods of forecast evaluation,
historical volatility models, the GARCH family, long memory models,
and stochastic volatility. It is aimed at “ﬁnance PhD students and prac-
titioners” (from the Preface) and isn’t an ideal book for a complete
beginner. This is mainly because a lot of information is given and it
may be too terse. It is also supplemented by an excellent bibliogra-
phy and a section that summarizes the results of 93 seminal volatility
studies.
Dynamic Hedging by Nassim Taleb (John Wiley & Sons, 1996)
This is also a book aimed at the professional option trader. It relies
heavily on rules of thumb for managing the risks of an options book. It
is weaker in either providing a theoretical basis or empirical evidence
for the efﬁciency or optimality of these rules. The focus is almost en-
tirely on managing the risk of options. There is no mention of volatil-
ity forecasting or ﬁnding trades with positive expected value. Despite
the title, the basic question of how to hedge a position is really not
answered in anything other than vague generalities. Despite all these
criticisms, this was and still is a very good introduction to what option
traders actually do. When it was ﬁrst published it was something of a
revelation.
The Psychology of Trading: Tools and Techniques for Minding the
Markets by Brett Steenbarger (John Wiley & Sons, 2004)
I said some harsh things in Chapter 8 about what has been written
on the psychological aspects of trading. I stand behind my criticism
of the vast majority of things written about this by people who are

Resources
189
neither psychologists nor traders. This book is a notable exception.
It is actually by a working therapist who applies clinical psychology
techniques to coach traders, with measurable results. He stresses the
need for an edge above all else but then shows ways we can coach
ourselves into being better traders.
The Volatility Surface: A Practitioner’s Guide by Jim Gatheral (John
Wiley & Sons, 2006)
This book provides a succinct introduction to stochastic volatility
models. It is well written without oversimplifying issues. Things are
looked at from the viewpoint of a practitioner rather than an academic.
The proofs are generally not formal and are designed to stress ﬁnancial
insight over rigor. Traders may ﬁnd some of the mathematics tough but
there is ﬁnancial insight to be gained for those whose persevere. There
are good sections on asymptotic solutions, volatility derivatives, and
basic credit derivatives.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING BOOKS
Your Worst Poker Enemy by Alan Schoonmaker (Lyle Stuart, 2007)
This book is very helpful to any trader who is open-minded enough
to replace “poker” with “trading.” It is full of practical advice on how to
cope with the pressure that a very short-term-oriented, results-driven
occupation can bring.
Blackbelt in Blackjack: Playing 21 as a Martial Art by Arnold Schny-
der (Cardoza, 2005)
Written by a member of the blackjack hall of fame (possibly not
Cooperstown but ahead of the Derivatives Hall of Fame), this book
teaches players how to play at a professional level. Just as in trading,
blackjack players need to ﬁnd an edge, manage their money, and exe-
cute their strategy. I doubt that traders who are unable to ﬁnd anything
relevant will have the imagination required to succeed over the long
term.
Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game by Michael Lewis
(W. W. Norton & Company, 2003)
A beautifully written book on how the Oakland A’s ﬁnd under-
valued players and manage to compete with teams whose payroll is
multiples of theirs. If the A’s tried to construct a team of all-stars
like the Yankees, they would lose. They were forced to try something
else. If everyone is doing one thing, to win we need to do it better. At
some point it may be better to try to do something different from the
crowd.

190
RESOURCES
On the Psychology of Military Incompetence by Norman Dixon (Basic
Books, 1976; Random House, 1994)
This is a far better historical study of the biases and deﬁciencies in
reasoning that we are prone to than anything likely to be found in the
business section.
USEFUL WEB SITES
www.nuclearphynance.com
This is a quantitative ﬁnance (quant) forum. The aggressive atti-
tude of the senior participants keeps the signal-to-noise ratio very high.
There is also a remarkable amount of mutual respect, and people gen-
erally only offer opinions and advice on topics on which they are truly
expert. Newcomers who use the search function ﬁrst and ask sensible
questions will be welcomed.
www.gummy-stuff.org
This remarkable site is owned by Peter Ponzo, a retired Canadian
mathematics professor who explains mathematical ﬁnance as a hobby.
The somewhat quirky style should not distract from the generally ex-
cellent teaching material. If you need to ﬁnd out how cointegration is
deﬁned or how to visualize skewness, this should be your ﬁrst stop.
www.ssrn.com
This is the web site of the Social Science Research Network.
Many academic papers (working and published) are available here.
The search function here should be the ﬁrst stop when one has to ﬁnd
information about a new topic.
www.nber.org
This is the web site of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Another large collection of papers is archived here. The focus is gener-
ally on macroeconomics. Some fundamental data is also available.
www.behaviouralﬁnance.net
This is probably the best place to look for behavioral ﬁnance pa-
pers. The papers are organized into categories. This site is a very good
place to brainstorm for new trading ideas.
www.unifr.ch/econophysics
This site has a collection of econophysics papers: papers apply-
ing the techniques of statistical physics to ﬁnance. There are also a
few book reviews and some data but these sections are only updated
sporadically. The worst econophysics is done by physicists who have
mastery of some technique and are determined to somehow apply it to

Resources
191
ﬁnance (every problem is a nail if your only technique is a hammer).
The best econophysics has given new insights into volatility by apply-
ing scaling laws to data and methods borrowed from condensed matter
studies to analyze the features of the order book. This site isn’t an ev-
eryday resource but it is worth looking at the new papers every few
weeks.
http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu
This site is a useful resource for following the citations of other
papers. For example, you can see who has written papers that refer to
the original Black-Scholes publication.
www.ivolatility.com
This site offers historical data, both in raw option prices, volatil-
ity by strike, and in the form of volatility indexes (similar to the VIX)
for U.S., European, and Canadian stock options, and a number of fu-
tures options. There are also a number of rankers, strategy articles, and
educational resources available.
www.earnings.com
This site offers historical data on earnings releases. It also features
webcasts of earnings calls and annual meetings. This is a very nice
resource if you need to analyze a company’s share price reaction to
earnings news.
http://ﬁnance.yahoo.com
I have this set to be my home page. This is the best place to begin
looking for any ﬁnancial data. It has historical data, press releases,
insider trades, analyst opinion, the latest news, and fundamental
information.

