About the CD-ROM
INTRODUCTION
This appendix provides you with information on the contents of the CD
that accompanies this book. For the latest and greatest information, please
refer to the ReadMe ﬁle located at the root of the CD.
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
r A CD-ROM drive
r Microsoft Excel
USING THE CD WITH WINDOWS
To install the items from the CD to your hard drive, follow these steps:
1. Insert the CD into your computer’s CD-ROM drive.
2. The CD-ROM interface will appear. The interface provides a simple
point-and-click way to explore the contents of the CD.
If the opening screen of the CD-ROM does not appear automatically, follow
these steps to access the CD:
1. Click the Start button on the left end of the taskbar and then choose
Run from the menu that pops up.
2. In the dialog box that appears, type d:\start.exe. (If your CD-ROM
drive is not drive d, ﬁll in the appropriate letter in place of d.) This
brings up the CD Interface described in the preceding set of steps.
201

202
ABOUT THE CD-ROM
WHAT’S ON THE CD
The following sections provide a summary of the software and other mate-
rials you’ll ﬁnd on the CD.
Content
Appendix B contains material about the CD.
The spreadsheets provided on the CD are of two types. Garch.xls,
Volatility Cones.xls, Skew and Kurtosis Cones.xls and Corrado Su.xls are
directly useful as trading tools. They are designed to assist a trader fore-
cast and evaluate volatility and compare this to the current option mar-
ket. Trade Evaluation.xls is a template for monitoring the progress of
trades. The second type of sheet contains simulation engines. Daily Option
Hedging Simulation.xls, Trade Goals.xls and Mean Reversion Simulator.xls
can help traders develop intuition and gain a deeper understanding of the
effects of randomness on option positions and general trading strategies.
Shareware programs are fully functional, trial versions of copyrighted
programs. If you like particular programs, register with their authors for
a nominal fee and receive licenses, enhanced versions, and technical
support.
Freeware programs are copyrighted games, applications, and utilities
that are free for personal use. Unlike shareware, these programs do not
require a fee or provide technical support.
GNU software is governed by its own license, which is included inside
the folder of the GNU product. See the GNU license for more details.
Trial, demo, or evaluation versions are usually limited either by time
or functionality (such as being unable to save projects). Some trial versions
are very sensitive to system date changes. If you alter your computer’s date,
the programs will “time out” and no longer be functional.
Customer Care
If you have trouble with the CD-ROM, please call the Wiley Product Techni-
cal Support phone number at (800) 762-2974. Outside the United States, call
1(317) 572–3994. You can also contact Wiley Product Technical Support at
http://support.wiley.com. John Wiley & Sons will provide technical sup-
port only for installation and other general quality control items. For tech-
nical support on the applications themselves, consult the program’s vendor
or author.
To place additional orders or to request information about other Wiley
products, please call (877) 762-2974.
