 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
3 
 
Sin city 
Over the last year or so we have produced a series of notes that have sought to provide 
an ‘outside’ perspective on the fund management industry. The driving force behind 
these notes is that whenever I present on behavioural finance to those in the industry the 
most frequent response I get is “That it is all very interesting but how do I apply it”.  
This note is my attempt to take some of the basic biases and then demonstrate just 
where they might crop up. Having been privy to a great many clients and their processes 
over the last twelve years or so, I decided to create a composite ‘typical’ large fund 
management house. As I thought about the various aspects of this firm’s investment 
process, so I began to see the areas where behavioural biases may reach their zenith. 
These became the seven sins of fund management.  
Sin 1: Forecasting (Pride) 
An enormous amount of evidence suggests that we simply can’t forecast. The core root 
of this inability to forecast seems to lie in the fact that we all seem to be over-optimistic 
and over-confident. For instance, we’ve found that around 75% of fund managers think 
they are above average at their jobs! It doesn’t matter whether it is forecasting bonds, 
equities, earnings or pretty much anything else, we are simply far too sure about our 
ability to forecast the future.  
Given the dreadful track records that can be seen from even a cursory glance at the data, 
it begs the question of why we bother to keep using forecasts? Let alone putting them at 
the very heart of the investment process? (A mistake probably 95% of the investment 
processes I’ve come across persist in making).  
The answer probably lies in a trait known as anchoring. That is in the face of uncertainty 
we will cling to any irrelevant number as support. Little wonder, then, that investors 
continue to rely on forecasts.  
Some have argued that any forecast is better than no forecast at all. For instance, Joe 
Nocera writing in the New York Times (1 October 2005) opined “Indeed, I wound up 
thinking that forecasting is to the market what gravity is to the earth. As much as we like 
to poke fun at faulty predictions, we can't function without them. Even if we disagree with, 
say, the analysts' consensus on Cisco, that consensus gives us a basis that helps us 
form our own judgments about whether it is overvalued or undervalued. Without 
forecasts, the market would no longer be grounded to anything.” 
This misses the point on many levels. Firstly, when it comes to anchoring we know that 
irrelevant numbers can influence people’s behaviour. For instance, Englich, Mussweiler 
and Strack1 show that legal experts were influenced by irrelevant anchors when setting 
jail sentences even when the experts were fully aware of the irrelevance of the input.  
In one study, participants (judges) were asked to role dice to determine the sentencing 
request from the prosecution. The pair of dice they used were loaded to either give a low 
number (1, 2) or a high number (3, 6). Having rolled the dice, participants were told to 
sum the scores and this number represented the prosecutions demand. Since the judges 
themselves rolled the dice, they could clearly see the input was totally irrelevant. 
However, the group who received the total score of 3 issued an average sentence of 5.3 
months; those who received a total score of 9 issued an average sentence of 7.8 months! 
So by even providing a forecast, people are likely to cling to it.  
                                            
1 Englich, Mussweiler and Strack( 2005) Playing dice with criminal sentences: the influence of irrelevant 
anchors on experts’ judicial decision making, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, forthcoming  

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
4 
 
Secondly, and this is a really radical idea, how about we anchor share values in 
something we can measure like dividends! Since we know people will stumble into the 
pitfall of anchoring, our best hope is getting them to anchor to something vaguely 
sensible. Support for this idea is offered by the work of Hirota and Sunder2. They show 
that in experimental markets, bubbles are much more likely to appear when investors 
lack dividends as an anchor.  
Sin 2: The illusion of knowledge (Gluttony) 
All too often it seems that we thirst for more and more information. Investors appear to 
believe that they need to know more than everyone else in order to outperform. This 
belief actually stems from an efficient markets view of the world. If markets are efficient, 
then the only way they can be beaten is by knowing something that everyone else 
doesn’t know i.e. knowing more information or knowing the future. So it is all the more 
paradoxical to find fund managers regularly displaying such a belief.  
The psychological literature suggests that we have cognitive limits to our capacity to 
handle information. Indeed we seem to make the same decision regardless of the 
amount of information we have at our disposal. Beyond pretty low amounts of 
information, anything we gather generally seems to increase our confidence rather than 
improve our accuracy. So more information isn’t better information, it is what you do with 
it, rather than how much you collect that matters,  
Sin 3: Meeting companies (Lust) 
Why does meeting companies hold such an important place in the investment process of 
many fund managers? Is it because they provide deep insights into why we should invest in 
them? Or is it because we need to fill out time with something that makes us look busy?  
There are at least five psychological hurdles that must be over-come if meeting 
companies is to add value to an investment process. Firstly, is the point just made above. 
More information isn’t better information, so why join the futile quest for an informational 
edge that probably doesn’t exist? Secondly, corporate managers are just like the rest of 
us. They tend to suffer from cognitive illusions, so their views are likely to be highly 
biased. Thirdly, we all tend to suffer from confirmatory bias – that is a habit of looking for 
information that agrees with us. So rather than asking lots of hard questions that test our 
base case, we tend to ask nice leading questions that generate the answers we want to 
hear. Fourthly, we have an innate tendency to obey figures of authority. Since company 
managers have generally reached the pinnacle of their profession, it is easy to envisage 
situations where analysts and fund managers find themselves effectively over-awed.  
Finally, the sad truth is that we are simply lousy at telling truth from deception. We all 
think we are great at spotting liars, but the data show otherwise, we generally perform in 
line with pure chance. So even when you meet companies you won’t be able to tell 
whether they are telling the truth or not.  
Sin 4: Thinking you can out-smart everyone else (Envy) 
One of the responses I occasionally encounter when teaching behavioural finance is 
“now I understand behavioural finance, I can out-smart everyone else”. To me this fails to 
learn the two most common behavioural traits mentioned earlier, over-optimism and over-
confidence.  To try to illustrate just how hard it was to be just one step ahead of everyone 
else, we played a version of Keynes’ beauty contests with our clients. The results 
illustrate just what a tall order such a strategy actually is. Only 3 people out of 1000 
managed to pick the correct answer!  
                                            
2 Hirota and Sunder (2003) Stock market as a beauty contest: investor beliefs and price bubbles sans 
dividend anchor, available from www.ssrn.com 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
5 
 
Sin 5: Short time horizons and overtrading (Avarice) 
Because so many investors end up confusing noise with news, and trying to out-smart 
each other, they end up with ridiculously short time horizons. The average holding period 
for a stock on the New York Stock Exchange is 11 months! Over 11 months your return is 
just a function of price changes. It has nothing to do with intrinsic value or discounted 
cash flow. It is just people punting on stocks, speculating not investing.  
Sin 6: Believing everything you read (Sloth) 
We all love a story. Stock brokers spin stories which act like sirens drawing investors 
onto the rocks. More often than not these stories hold out the hope of growth, and 
investors find the allure of growth almost irresistible. The only snag is that all too often 
that growth fails to materialise.  
Sadly, we appear to be hard-wired to accept stories at face value. In fact, evidence 
suggests that in order to understand something we have to believe it first. Then, if we are 
lucky, we might engage in an evaluative process. Even the most ridiculous of 
excuses/stories is enough to get results. For instance, Langer et al3 asked people in a 
queue for a photocopier if they could push in. Sometimes, they offered the ‘placebic’ 
excuse it was because ‘they needed to make copies’, on other occasions an excuse was 
omitted altogether. When the excuse was left out, 42% of people let the experimenter 
push in front of them. When the excuse was included nearly 60% of people gave way to 
the experimenter! We need to be sceptical of the stories we are presented with.  
Sin 7: Group based decisions (Wrath) 
The final sin I’ve covered in this collection is the generally held belief that groups are 
better at making decisions than individuals. The dream model of a group is that it meets, 
exchanges ideas and reaches sensible conclusions. The idea seems to be that group 
members will offset each other’s biases.  
Unfortunately, social psychologists have spent most of the last 30 years showing that 
groups’ decisions are amongst the worst decisions ever made. Far from offsetting each 
others biases, groups usually end up amplifying them! Groups tend to reduce the 
variance of opinions, and lead members to have more confidence in their decisions after 
group discussions (without improving accuracy). They also tend to be very bad at 
uncovering hidden information. Indeed, members of groups frequently enjoy enhanced 
competency and credibility in the eyes of their peers if they provide information that is 
consistent with the group view. So using groups as the basis of asset allocation or stock 
selection seems to be yet another self imposed handicap on performance.  
Alternative approaches and future directions 
Over the course of publishing these notes, some have noticed that they tend to provide a 
list of ‘don’ts’, as in don’t forecast, don’t meet company managements, etc. Personally I 
have no problem with this, as knowing what not to do should itself be a useful guide. 
However, some would prefer a list of what to do. I’ve explored in many notes the possible 
use of alternative approaches, these generally rely on a quantitative approach to 
investing (see Global Equity Strategy, 16 March 2005) and I will be writing on this again 
soon. The seven sins listed here are not the only ones that could occur. Future work will 
be directed towards other sins including the illusion of control, the possibility of having too 
much choice, and benchmarking. But in the meantime we hope the notes selected here 
provide some hints as to how we might construct an investment process that may be 
slightly more robust to behavioural biases than many currently appear. 
 
                                            
3 Langer, Blank and Chanowitz (1978) The mindlessness of ostensibly thoughtful action, Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 36 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is left blank intentionally 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
7 
 
Sin 1 
Forecasting 
 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is left blank intentionally 
