 
 
 
 
 
DrKW Macro research 
Equity Strategy | Global 
 
  
31 August 2005 
Global Equity Strategy 
The illusion of knowledge or Is more information better information? 
 
 
Online research: 
www.drkwresearch.com 
 
Bloomberg: 
DRKW<GO> 
Please refer to the Disclosure Appendix for all relevant disclosures and our 
disclaimer.  In respect of any compendium report covering six or more companies, 
all 
relevant 
disclosures 
are 
available 
on 
our 
website 
www.drkwresearch.com/disclosures
or by contacting the DrKW Research 
Department at the address below. 
 
Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited, Authorised and regulated by the Financial Services Authority and a Member Firm of the 
London Stock Exchange PO Box 560, 20 Fenchurch Street, London EC3P 3DB.  Telephone: +44 20 7623 8000 Telex: 916486 Registered in 
England No. 1767419 Registered Office: 20 Fenchurch Street, London EC3P 3DB.  A Member of the Dresdner Bank Group. 
 
Research Analyst 
James Montier 
+44 (0)20 7475 6821 
james.montier@drkw.com 
 
 
The amount of information that assails us on a daily basis is truly staggering. 
Unfortunately, we tend to equate information with knowledge. Sadly the two are 
often very different beasts. We also tend to labour under the misapprehension 
that more information is the same as better information. Experimental evidence 
suggests that often where information is concerned less is more!   
 
► The traditional view holds that more information is always preferably to less. After all, the 
argument goes, if the information is useless it will be ignored. However, implicit within this 
viewpoint is an assumption that we are all supercomputers who can deal with the 
seemingly endless torrent of informational deluge.  
► However, we aren’t idealised supercomputers. Instead we have only limited capacity to 
process information. Despite our obvious cognitive constraints, many investors persist in 
believing that in order to outperform they need to know more than everyone else. Hence 
they get caught up trying to know absolutely everything there is to know about a stock 
before investing.  
► Numerous studies have shown that increasing information leads to increased 
overconfidence rather than increased accuracy. For instance, Slovic asked bookmakers 
to select information they would like to know in order to work out the odds on a horse 
race. They were then given increasing amount of information and asked for their 
prediction and their confidence in those predictions. Whilst accuracy was pretty much a 
flat line regardless of information, confidence was strongly increased with the amount of 
information. So all that happened was the extra information made the bookies more and 
more overconfident without improving their performance at all.  
► Information can actually be detrimental to decision-making.  Handzic set participants a 
challenge to estimate the demand for ice cream the next day given either one useful 
signal or three useful signals. The group with three signals were less efficient in 
processing the information, and made worst forecasts!  
► Davis et al asked people to forecast fourth quarter earnings based on the last three 
quarters EPS, net sales and stock prices (the base line), or the baseline plus some extra 
information (which in some cases was useful, in others it was irrelevant/redundant). Just 
the presence of extra information (be it useful or not) was enough to significantly increase 
the error rate of forecasts. As with many of the other studies discussed here, more 
information led to increased confidence; with redundant information increasing 
confidence above the baseline, and relevant information leading to a marked increase in 
confidence over irrelevant information. In all cases, subjects displayed massive 
overconfidence.  
► All of these studies suggest that rather than obsessing with the bewildering informational 
fusion of news and noise, we should concentrate on a few key elements in stock 
selection, i.e. what are the five most important things we should know about any stock we 
are about to invest in? Of course, if I knew the answer I would have retired long ago!  

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
32 
 
The illusion of knowledge or Is more 
information better information?  
Regular readers will know that I have a penchant for quoting ancient Asian seers. This 
week’s words of wisdom come from Confucius, who stated “To know that we know what 
we know, and that to know we do not know what we do not know, that is true knowledge”. 
For those who prefer more modern quotations then Daniel J. Boorstin’s view that “The 
greatest obstacle to discovery is not ignorance – it is the illusion of knowledge” will 
suffice.  
In last week’s note I observed that the behaviour of many investors is consistent with a 
belief in the efficient market hypothesis (EMH). That is to say, that many investors seem 
to believe that they need to know more than everyone else in order to outperform the 
market. This is related to EMH because under EMH the only way to beat the market is to 
know something that isn’t embodied in prices. So they spend their days in what I have 
previously described as the futile quest for edge. That is, reading, learning and 
researching absolutely everything there is to know about the firm they are about to invest 
in, in the belief that information edge will lead to outperformance.  
This is generally part of a larger body of thinking that has its roots in economics, which is 
that more is always preferred to less (for a normal good). To most who have trained in 
economics, more choice is always preferable to less choice, and more information is 
always better than less information. After all, the economists argue, if the information is 
useless then people will simply ignore it.  
At first glance this may well seem like a reasonable proposition. However, the key 
question must surely be: Is it true empirically? Is more information equivalent to better 
information? Are the cognitive constraints inherent in our brains binding? 
The first person to study this conundrum was Oskamp23 way back in 1965. Oskamp set 
up a profile of a young man (Joseph Kidd) who was seeking clinical psychological help. 
In the first stage the psychologists were given just a very brief demographic based 
analysis of Kidd. They were told he was 29 years old, white, unmarried, a veteran of 
World War II. They were also informed he was a college graduate who now works as a 
business assistant in a floral decorating studio.  
At the end of each presentation of material the psychologists had to answers questions 
on Kidd’s behavioural patterns, attitudes, interests and typical reactions to real life 
events. Stage I was deliberately minimal to establish a base rate to compare later stages 
with.  
Stage II added 1 ½ pages of information about Kidd’s childhood through to the age of 12. 
Stage III was 2 pages on his high school and college experiences. The final stage of 
information covered his army service and later life up to the present day.  
The chart below shows the impact of increasing information on accuracy and self-
reported confidence amongst the psychologists. As Oskamp notes “No judge ever 
reached 50% accuracy and the average final accuracy was less than 28%, where chance 
was 20%.”  
Despite the fact that accuracy only increases marginally as the information increases, 
look what happens to the confidence measures. They explode from an average 33% in 
Stage I to an average 53% in Stage IV.  
                                            
23 Oskamp (1965) Overconfidence in case-study judgements, The Journal of Consulting Psychology, 29  

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
33 
 
Accuracy and confidence (%) 
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IV
Accuracy
Confidence
 
Source: Adapted from Oskamp 
Oskamp also monitored the number of psychologists who changed their minds at each 
stage. He found that as the amount of information increased, so the number of 
participants changing their minds dropped! From 40% in stage II to just 25% in stage IV. 
As Oskamp notes the psychologists “May frequently have formed stereotype 
conclusions rather firmly from their first fragmentary information and then been 
reluctant to change their conclusions as they received new information”.  
% of participants changing their minds each round 
20
25
30
35
40
45
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IV
 
Source: Adapted from Oskamp 
Oskamp’s findings were confirmed in a very different setting by work by Paul Slovic24. 
Eight experienced bookmakers were shown a list of 88 variables found on a typical past 
performance chart on a horse, e.g. the weight to be carried, the number of races won, the 
performance in different conditions, etc. Each bookmaker was then asked to rank the 
pieces of information by importance.  
Having done this, the bookmakers were then given data for 40 past races and asked to 
rank the top five horses in each race. Each bookmaker was given the past data in 
increments of the 5,10, 20 and 40 variables he had selected as most important. Hence 
each bookmaker predicted the outcome of each race four times – once for each of the 
information sets. For each prediction the bookmakers were asked to give a degree of 
confidence ranking in their forecast.  
                                            
24 Slovic (1973) Behavioral problems adhering to a decision policy, unpublished paper 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
34 
 
The chart below shows how both accuracy and confidence change as the information set 
grows over time. Accuracy is pretty much a flat line regardless of the amount of 
information the bookmakers had at their disposal! 
Accuracy vs. confidence for bookmakers as a function of the information set 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
5
10
20
40
Accuracy
Confidence
%
Data point  
Source: Slovic (1973) 
However, look what happened to the bookmakers’ confidence. It soared as the 
information set increased. With five pieces of information, accuracy and confidence were 
quite closely related. However, by the time 40 pieces of information were being used, 
accuracy was still exactly the same, but confidence has soared to over 30%! So more 
information isn’t better information, it is what you do with it rather than how much 
you can get that truly matters.  
Two other experiments are worth bringing in at this stage. The first comes from work by 
Meliha Handzic25. She set an experimental task in which the objective was to make 
optimal production targets. She created an imaginary dairy firm supplying ice cream to an 
outlet at Bondi Beach. Participants took on the role of production manager at the dairy 
firm. They were told that underestimating and overestimating demand incurred equal 
costs (through loss of market to other outlets, or though spoilt product respectively). The 
goal was to try and minimise the costs incurred by incorrect production decisions.  
At the end of each day, participants were asked to set production quotas for ice cream to 
be sold the next day. In order to help them with their decisions they were given either one 
piece of information or three pieces of information. After discussing with actual ice cream 
vendors on Bondi Beach the factors identified as critical were the ambient air 
temperature, the amount of sunshine and the number of visitors. All these cues were 
deemed to be equally reliable in predicting the daily product demand. Participants were 
split into two groups; the only difference between the groups was the amount of 
information they received.  
Handzic constructed two measures of performance. Firstly, processing efficiency (ROE) 
which was measured as an individual’s error relative to the optimal error, where the 
optimal error was the result of a regression equation using the three informational cues. 
A ROE of 1 indicated an individual behaved in exactly the same way as the optimal 
regression model, a score above indicates suboptimal information processing efficiency.  
The chart below shows the ROE scores for the two groups. The group that received more 
information actually performed far worse than the group who received only one item of 
information. So in terms of information processing, more information certainly hampered 
decision-making.  
                                            
25 Handzic (2001) Does more information lead to better informing? Informing Science, Challenges to 
Informing Clients: A transdisciplinary approach 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
35 
 
Processing efficiency (ROE) 1 = optimal, >1 sub-optimal 
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
Small
Large
 
Source: Adapted from Handzic (2001) 
The other performance measure that Handzic used was decision accuracy (RNE), 
defined as the ratio of the absolute error in an individuals decision relative to the 
corresponding error from a simple naïve (random walk) prediction that the best guess of 
today’s quota was yesterday’s actual sales outturn. Because such models ignore all 
contextual information they usually perform poorly.  
A RNE score of 1 indicates that individuals match the performance of the naïve model, 
indicating no improvement, whilst scores lower than one indicate an improvement relative 
to the naïve model. The chart below shows the average RNE scores for each group.  
The group with only one informational cue managed to produce a marginal improvement 
on a simple random walk. However, the group with all the information actually managed 
to significantly underperform the random walk, and the group with less information!  
Decision accuracy (RNE, 1 indicates random walk, <1 improvement on random walk) 
0.8
0.9
0.9
1.0
1.0
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.2
Small
Large
 
Source: Adapted from Handzic (2001) 
The final study I would like to draw to your attention is from Davis et al26. This study is 
particularly relevant to finance as it concerns the impact of information on earnings 
forecasts. Davis et al’s guinea pigs were students on an MBA course on advanced 
financial statement analysis, most had worked in the industry prior to taking their MBAs. 
The task they were given was to forecast fourth quarter earnings for various different 
firms. In fact, there were 15 firms, but each firm was presented in one of three different 
information formats. The information formats were (i) baseline data consisting of the past 
three quarters of EPS, net sales and stock price; (ii) baseline data plus redundant or 
                                            
26 Davis, Lohse and Kottemann (1994) Harmful effects of seemingly helpful information on forecasts of 
stock earnings, Journal of Economic Psychology, 15 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
36 
 
irrelevant information, ie information that was already embodied in the baseline data such 
as the PE ratio; (iii) baseline data plus non-redundant information which should have 
improved forecasting ability such as the dividend was increased. None of the participants 
realised that they had seen the same company in three different formats, perhaps 
because each presentation was separated by at least seven other profiles.  
Each respondent was not only asked for their forecast but also for their confidence in 
their forecast. The chart below shows the mean square error ((forecast-actual)^2/actual) 
as a measure of accuracy. Both redundant and non-redundant information 
significantly increased forecast error!  
Mean square error of forecast 
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Baseline only
Baseline plus redundant 
information
Baseline plus 
nonredundant
 
Source: adapted from Davis et al (1994) 
The chart below shows the self-reported confidence ratings for each of the conditions. 
Davis et al found that redundant information led to a significant increase in confidence 
over and above the baseline information, and non-redundant information led to a marked 
increase over redundant information.  
Confidence as a function of information (%)  
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
Baseline only
Baseline plus redundant 
information
Baseline plus 
nonredundant
 
Source: adapted from Davis et al  (1994) 
The amount of information that assails us on a daily basis is truly staggering. Noise and 
news have fused together in a bewildering deluge of data. Rather than obsessing about 
every piece of information that crosses our screens, we should attempt to avoid being 
sucked into the mire of emails, voicemails and other wild goose chases. Instead we should 
devote time to working out what we should really be looking at. What are the five most 
important things we should know about any stock we are about to invest in? Of course, if I 
knew the answer I would have retired a long time ago! A hint might be that spending hours 
in meeting companies to gather information, may not be the best use of your time!  

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
37 
 
Sin 3  
Meeting companies 
 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is left blank intentionally 
