 
 
 
 
 
DrKW Macro research 
Equity Strategy | Global 
 
  
27 April 2005 
Global Equity Strategy 
The story is the thing, or the allure of growth 
 
 
Online research: 
www.drkwresearch.com 
 
Bloomberg: 
DRKW<GO> 
Please refer to the Disclosure Appendix for all relevant disclosures and our 
disclaimer.  In respect of any compendium report covering six or more companies, 
all 
relevant 
disclosures 
are 
available 
on 
our 
website 
www.drkwresearch.com/disclosures
or by contacting the DrKW Research 
Department at the address below. 
 
Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited, Authorised and regulated by the Financial Services Authority and a Member Firm of the 
London Stock Exchange PO Box 560, 20 Fenchurch Street, London EC3P 3DB.  Telephone: +44 20 7623 8000 Telex: 916486 Registered in 
England No. 1767419 Registered Office: 20 Fenchurch Street, London EC3P 3DB.  A Member of the Dresdner Bank Group. 
 
Research Analysts 
James Montier 
+44 (0)20 7475 6821 
james.montier@drkw.com 
 
Shakespeare wrote “The play’s the thing”. For investors it appears that the story 
is the thing. In a rational world, we gather evidence, weight it and then decide. 
However, people rely on stories instead. We gather the evidence (in a biased 
fashion), construct a story to explain the evidence, and then match the story to a 
decision. This reliance on stories helps to drive investors into the growth trap.  
 
► A former colleague of mine once wrote that ‘stockbrokers exist to sell dreams’, I have 
long held that the corollary to this statement should be ‘but they deliver nightmares’. 
Despite my skepticism, investors seem to love to listen to the siren songs of 
stockbrokers. Why?  
► In a rational world, we would all go around gathering the evidence, and then evaluating it 
and weighing it before reaching our decision. However, real world behaviour is a long 
way from the rational viewpoint. We collect evidence (usually in a biased fashion), then 
we construct a story to explain the evidence. This story (not the original evidence) is then 
used to reach a decision. Psychologists call this explanation-based decision-making.  
► Experiments have shown that stories can have a massive impact upon decision-making. 
For instance, in a mock trial situation when the prosecution presented the evidence in a 
story order, but the defence presented evidence in witness order, 78% of jurors found the 
suspect guilty. However, when the formats were reversed only 31% of jurors found the 
suspect guilty!  
► Other experiments have found that in simulation markets, participants trade on rumours 
(and lose money) but keep saying that they don’t believe the rumour and that it didn’t 
impact their decision-making. The researchers found that to persuade participants to 
trade, the rumour merely needed to ‘explain’ current share price moves!  
► New research shows that investors behave just like jurors. They map information into a 
story, and then use the story as a basis for making decisions. All too often investors are 
sucked into plausible sounding stories. For instance, the story that the internet would 
alter the way the world did business was probably true, but it doesn’t necessarily 
translate into profits for investors.  
► The current market obsession with China is another potential example of investors being 
sucked into a growth story. Those piling into commodities on the back of the fact that 
China is the largest consumer of just about everything are likely to end up ruing their 
decision. 
► Indeed, trying to invest in the fastest growing emerging equity markets has been a very 
poor strategy in the past. Those economies with the highest GDP growth have delivered 
the lowest returns. Whilst those economies with the lowest GDP growth have delivered 
the highest returns. Why? Because investors end up overpaying for the hope of growth. 
Beware the growth trap.  

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
82 
 
The story is the thing, or the allure of 
growth 
Way back in the dim and distant past, I studied English Literature (not that any of the 
literary genius I studied rubbed off on me!). However, one of the few things I remember 
from those long ago studies was a quote from Shakespeare which could be wheeled out 
whenever one was discussing his plays. In order to stress the importance of seeing a 
play in production rather than simply reading it, a quotation from Hamlet was most useful: 
“The play’s the thing wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the king”.  
With profound apologies to the bard, the investment equivalent would seem to be ‘the 
story’s the thing wherein I’ll capture the conscience of the investor’. A former colleague of 
mine once wrote that ‘stockbrokers exist to sell dreams’, I have long held that the 
corollary to this statement should be ‘but they deliver nightmares’. The only snag is that 
people love to listen to the siren songs of the stockbrokers. Why?  
We appear to use stories to help us reach decisions. In the ‘rational’ view of the world we 
observe the evidence, we then weigh the evidence, and finally we come to our decision. 
Of course, in the rational view we all collect the evidence in a well-behaved unbiased 
fashion. Regular readers will know that this isn’t a good description of the way in which 
most evidence is gathered. Usually we are prone to only look for the information that 
happens to agree with us (confirmatory bias) etc.  
However, the real world of behaviour is a long way from the rational viewpoint, and not 
just in the realm of information gathering. The second stage of the rational decision is a 
weighing of the evidence. However, as the diagram below shows, a more commonly 
encountered approach is to construct a narrative to explain the evidence that has been 
gathered (the story model of thinking).  
The rational view 
 
 
 
 
The story view 
 
 
 
Hastie and Pennington are the leading advocates of the story view (also known as 
explanation-based decision making)48. The central hypothesis of the explanation-based 
view is that the decision maker constructs a summary story of the evidence and then 
uses this story, rather than the original raw evidence, to make their final decision.  
Hastie and Pennington note “This intermediate mental model of the decision facilitates 
evidence comprehension, directs inferencing, enables the decision maker to reach a 
decision, and determines the confidence assigned to the accuracy or expected success 
of the decision”.  
                                            
48 See Hastie and Pennington (2000) Explanation-Based Decision Making in Connolly, Arkes and 
Hammond (2000) Judgement and decision making: An interdisciplinary reader (Cambridge University 
Press) for an up to date summary of the field. 
Gather evidence 
Weigh and 
evaluate evidence 
Decide 
Gather evidence 
Explain the 
evidence with a 
story 
Match story to 
possible decisions 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
83 
 
Much of the original work on the importance of stories has been investigated in the realm 
of jurors. However, the same mental processes are likely to be at work when it comes to 
investment decisions.  
Consider Hastie and Pennington’s description of the juror’s decisions task: 
First, a massive ‘database’ of evidence is presented at trial, frequently 
comprising of several days of testimony, exhibits, and arguments. Second, 
the evidence comes in a scrambled sequence, usually many witnesses and 
exhibits convey pieces of the historical puzzle in a jumbled temporal 
sequence. Third, the evidence is piecemeal and gappy in its depiction of the 
historical events that are the focus of reconstruction: event descriptions are 
incomplete, usually some critical events were not observed by the available 
witnesses, and information about personal reactions and motivations is not 
presented... Finally, subparts of the evidence are interdependent in their 
probative implications for the verdict. The meaning of one statement cannot 
be assessed in isolation because it depends on the meanings of several 
other related statements.  
In several empirical tests, Pennington and Hastie49 have investigated the decision 
making process of jurors. They uncovered that jurors who had reached different verdicts 
had constructed different stories with distinctly different configurations of events. They 
also found that people found it easier to construct a story when the evidence was ordered 
in a temporal and causal sequence that matched the original events.  
The table below shows the results of a mock juror test in which participants were asked 
to listen to a 100 sentence summary of a trial, with 50 prosecution and 50 defence 
statements, and a judge’s charge to choose between a First degree murder verdict and a 
not guilty verdict. Exactly the same material was presented in each case, only the format 
of the statements was changed. Sometimes the information was presented in story order, 
and on other occasions it was presented in witness order.  
The impact the format had was staggering. When the prosecution presented evidence in 
the story order, and the defence used witness order, 78% of jurors returned a guilty 
verdict. Conversely, when the roles were reversed only 31% of jurors returned a guilty 
verdict!  
% of jurors returning a guilty verdict 
 
Defence 
 
Story order 
Witness order
Prosecution 
Story order
59% 
78%
 
Witness order
31% 
63%
Source: Pennington and Hastie (1988) 
Hastie et al50 also investigated explanation-based decision making in civil cases. They 
asked people to ”think aloud as you make your decisions about the verdict”. They noted 
that the first step was again the construction of a story to explain the evidence. This 
summary “included the major events from evidence that the juror believed occurred, 
ordered in a temporal sequence. This narrative included causal linkages, many of them 
inferred, that serve as “glue” holding the story... together”.  
                                            
49 See Pennington and Hastie (1986) Evidence evaluation in complex decision making, Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 51, and (1988) Explanation-based decision making: the effects of 
memory structure on judgement, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 
Vol 14 
50 See Hastie, Schkade and Payne (1997) Juror judgements in civil cases: Assessing punitive damages, 
Center for Research on Judgement and Policy 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
84 
 
If you are anything like me then the parallels between the juror and the investor are likely 
to leap out to you. Before giving you an example of one instance of explanation-based 
decision making in real world financial markets, I want to talk about two other studies.  
The first is by DiFonzo and Bordia51. They tested the impact of rumours on financial 
markets. Having set up two experimental stock markets, they subjected one to news and 
the other to rumours. They found that when they introduced rumours, investors started to 
trade on them (but didn’t make any money out of them!). Participants claimed the rumour 
sources weren’t credible, and didn’t impact upon their decision to trade. However, in a 
world in which actions speak louder than words, the participants were found to trade as if 
the rumours were news! In order to persuade participants to trade, the rumour merely 
needed to ‘explain’ current share price moves. This fits with the importance of the 
explanation-based view of the world.  
The other study is a new paper by Mulligan and Hastie52. They aim to test if “qualitative 
information in the financial investment arena is mentally organized in a story structure, 
analogous to the stories jurors rely on to ‘find the facts’”.  
Participants were given stories about firms working in the medical sector. Each story 
contained five elements (listed out in the table below). The aim of the task was to pick 
investments over the next 2-5 years. After each line of text was revealed participants 
were asked whether or not they would purchase the stock for a long time horizon, and 
how confident they were (on a scale of one to five).  
The elements of the story 
Stage 
Type of information 
Context 
Company's past success 
Problem 
Criticism or praise recently received 
Reaction 
Company's intention to work harder or continue as usual 
Plan 
Hiring or firing of employees 
Outcome 
Stated whether the new product was successful or not 
Source: Mulligan and Hastie (2005) 
In one format the story was given in order, in the other the elements of the story were 
scrambled. The chart below shows the mean regression weights for each story 
component as a function of the presentation format. Note the spike upwards in the 
regression weight assigned to the outcome when the story is told in the correct order.  
Mean regression weights for each story component 
Source: Mulligan and Hastie (2005) 
                                            
51 DiFonzo and Bordia (1997) Rumour and prediction: making sense (but losing dollars) in the stock 
market, Organizational Behaviour and Human Decision Processes, Vol 71 
52 Mulligan and Hastie (2005) Explanations determine the impact of information on financial investment 
judgements, Journal of Behavioural Decision Making, Vol 18 
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Context
Problem
Reaction
Plan
Outcome
Story order
Scramble

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
85 
 
Mulligan and Hastie conclude “participants in the story order condition still relied primarily 
on the outcome piece when making decisions... Once a coherent mental representation 
of a story has been constructed, people do not break down the story into its component 
pieces and use them independently, even when it might be sensible, even rational, to do 
so... These order-of-information effects make sense in the context of an explanation-
based theory of judgement, but they are patently irrational in the context of traditional 
theories of investment finance.”  
Just like jurors, investors seem to frame their worlds in terms of stories rather than facts. It 
is exactly this trait that makes stories so dangerous. All too often investors are sucked 
into plausible sounding stories. Indeed, underlying some of the most noted bubbles in 
history are kernels of truth. For instance, the story that the internet would alter the way the 
world did business is probably true, but it doesn’t necessarily translate into profits for 
investors.  
Indeed we recently wrote on the dangers of growth investing based around the risks 
involved in listening to the stories at the stock level (see Global Equity Strategy, 16 
March 2005). However, investors’ love affair with China stands out as another great 
example of the seemingly insatiable thirst for growth.  
Investors seem to be able to effortlessly trot out amazing facts and figures on Chinese 
demand for raw materials. One of my favourite examples is a well known fund 
management house quoted in the FT as saying “Chinese demand for commodities is 
revolutionising global commodity markets. China has already overtaken the USA as the 
largest consumer of iron ore, steel and copper”. The FT concludes “The China effect 
seems unstoppable53.”  All of these may well be true, but does it make sense to base an 
investment decision on such stories?  
Indeed, in the realm of emerging markets investors seem to be addicted to growth. The 
three charts overleaf tell an interesting story. The first relates average GDP growth rates 
to average dollar stock returns. The relationship is the opposite of the one many 
investors believe exists. Those economies with the lowest growth rates seem to deliver 
the highest returns, whilst those with the highest growth rates deliver the lowest returns! 
Why? The most logical explanation is that investors end up overpaying for growth (much 
like they do at the stock level).  
The middle chart overleaf suggests that investors would be better off buying cheap 
emerging markets rather than being sucked into investing in fast growing economies. The 
chart shows the relationship between PEs and subsequent returns over the next ten years. 
The cheapest emerging markets have the highest returns, whilst the most expensive tend 
to have the lowest returns. This is the long-run counterpart of work we have previously 
done showing that cheap emerging markets outperform expensive ones (even in the 
relatively short term, see Global Equity Strategy, 12 January 2005, for details).  
The final chart is aimed at seeing if it is indeed fast growth that tempts investors to 
overpay. It shows the relationship between the GDP growth rates from 1990-1995 and 
the PEs at the end of 1995. Whilst there is not a very strong relationship, there is 
nonetheless a relationship which suggests that investors do indeed end up paying too 
much for growth.  
Investors enamoured with China, and its growth potential, would perhaps be well advised 
to study history and understand that growth is often not the panacea that it seems to be. 
Dependency upon stories for decision-making is one reason why investors keep 
stumbling into the growth trap year after year.  
                                            
53 China effect convulses commodity markets, Financial Times, 15 November 2003 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
86 
 
Average GDP growth vs average dollar stock returns (1988-2004) 
Source: MSCI, DrKW Macro research 
1995 PEs vs. ten year dollar stock market returns  
Source: MSCI, DrKW Macro research 
GDP growth rates 1990-1995 and 1995 PEs 
Source: MSCI, DrKW Macro research 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
10
15
20
25
30
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
2
4
6
8
10
