 
 
 
 
 
DrKW Macro research 
Global Equity | Strategy 
 
  
26 October 2005 
Global Equity Strategy 
Scepticism is rare, or, Descartes vs. Spinoza 
 
 
Online research: 
www.drkwresearch.com 
 
Bloomberg: 
DRKW<GO> 
Please refer to the Disclosure Appendix for all relevant disclosures and our 
disclaimer.  In respect of any compendium report covering six or more companies, 
all 
relevant 
disclosures 
are 
available 
on 
our 
website 
www.drkwresearch.com/disclosures
or by contacting the DrKW Research 
Department at the address below. 
 
Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited, Authorised and regulated by the Financial Services Authority and a Member Firm of the 
London Stock Exchange PO Box 560, 20 Fenchurch Street, London EC3P 3DB.  Telephone: +44 20 7623 8000 Telex: 916486 Registered in 
England No. 1767419 Registered Office: 20 Fenchurch Street, London EC3P 3DB.  A Member of the Dresdner Bank Group. 
 
Research Analyst 
James Montier 
+44 (0) 207 475  6821 
james.montier@drkw.com 
 
 
In the blue corner, Descartes. In the red corner, Spinoza. Two great C17th 
philosophers, two very different views on the human mind. Descartes thought that 
understanding and belief were separate acts. Spinoza argued they were one and 
the same. The evidence supports Spinoza.  In order to understand something we 
seem to need to believe it. We seem to be hardwired to ‘believe’!  
 
►  Why is it that we end up believing such strange ideas? For instance, supposedly smart 
people buy into myths such as stocks for the long run and ideas such as dividends don’t 
matter. In order to investigate why we end up holding such beliefs we need to understand 
how we handle ideas in our minds.  
► Daniel Gilbert, a Harvard psychologist, has explored this issue in depth. He suggests that 
there are two visions of the way our minds work when presented with new ideas. 
According to the work of Descartes, we hold the idea in a sort of mental limbo, proceed to 
evaluate it, and then reach a conclusion as to its veracity. This sits well with folk 
psychology in as much as it sounds like the way we would like to think we work.  
► However, Spinoza had an alternative take on the process. He believed that our minds 
had to hold an idea as true in order to actually understand it. Then, if we are lucky, we 
might engage in an evaluative process. Once this is completed we then form a corrected 
belief.  
► Gilbert and his co-authors have run many ingenious experiments designed to show which 
of these processes is the closest description of the way in which our minds work. The 
evidence they have uncovered strongly supports the Spinozan view of the world. For 
instance, people asked to read statements on a crime.  They were told some of the 
sentences they would read were false and written in red ink. However, when people were 
distracted from this task (by asking them to hunt for numbers at the same time as 
reading) they ended up believing the false statements to be true. This had a very material 
impact on the recommended jail term for the crime. When the false statements 
exacerbated the crime and the readers were distracted, they recommended a jail time 
that was 60% longer than when they weren’t distracted!  
► The thought that we seem to believe everything in order to understand it is more than a 
little disconcerting. It would seem to render us powerless to control our beliefs. However, 
don’t despair just yet, two potential strategies are available to us. Firstly, what Gilbert 
calls ‘unbelieving’. This effectively requires us to analytically assess our beliefs and 
confront them with reality. However, cognitive load, pressure and time constraints all sap 
our ability to follow this path. Secondly, we can follow an exclusion strategy, simply 
avoiding the generators of false beliefs, just as dieters may choose to avoid doughnut 
shops.  
► A combination of these strategies is likely to be optimal. When you are really trying to 
assess the validity of an argument do your best to avoid distraction. Turn off your screens 
and blackberries, put your phones on call forward, ignore your colleagues!  

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
88 
 
Scepticism is rare, or, Descartes vs. 
Spinoza 
Sometime ago a client asked us to compile a list of myths that the markets seemed to 
hold dear. We came up with twelve potential myths ranging from stocks for the long run 
to dividends don’t matter via such topics as commodities for the future and bond supply 
matters. However, this exercise also made me wonder why it was that supposedly smart 
people ended up believing such strange things.  
This pondering sent me (as is usually the case) to the annals of psychology. To some 
extent these errant beliefs seem to stem from bounded awareness/inattentional blindness 
and framing. We have explored such elements before (see Global Equity Strategy, 16 
September 2004, What you see isn’t what you get). However, there may well be another 
factor at work. We seem to be hard wired to ‘believe’.  
Daniel Gilbert, a professor of psychology at Harvard, has explored how we go about 
believing and understanding information. In a series of truly insightful papers54 Gilbert 
and co-authors have explored the belief process using two alternative philosophical 
viewpoints.  
Cartesian systems 
The first view is associated with the work of Rene Descartes. When it came to belief, 
Descartes suggested the mind performs two separate mental acts. First it understands 
the idea. Secondly, the mind assesses the validity of the idea that has been presented. 
This two stage process seems intuitively correct. After all, we can all imagine being 
presented with some novel idea, holding it in our minds and then pondering the truth or 
otherwise associated with the idea. The Cartesian approach fits well with folk psychology.  
Descartes was educated by Jesuits and like many 17th century philosophers generally 
deployed psychology and philosophy in the aid of theology. Like anyone of any sense 
Descartes was well aware that people were capable of believing things that weren’t true. 
In order to protect the Church, Descartes argued that God had given man the power to 
assess ideas. So it clearly wasn’t God’s fault when people believed things that weren’t 
true.  
As Gilbert (1993, op cit) notes, Descartes approach consisted of two axioms. Firstly, the 
mental separation and sequencing of understanding and believing and secondly, that 
people have no control over how or what they understand, but are totally free to believe 
or disbelieve ideas as they please.  
Spinozan systems 
Spinoza’s background and thinking could not be much more different than Descartes. 
Born a Jew, Barauch de Espinoza (later to become Benedict Spinoza) outraged his 
community and synagogue. The tensions finally resulted in Spinoza being 
excommunicated, accused of abominable heresies and monstrous deeds. The order of 
excommunication prohibited other members of the synagogue from having any contact 
with Spinoza.  
                                            
54 Gilbert, Krull, Malone (1990) Unbelieving the unbelievable: Some problems in the rejection of false 
information, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59.  
Gilbert (1991) How mental systems believe, American Psychologist, 46 
Gilbert, Tafarodi, Malone (1993) You can’t believe everything you read, Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 65 
Gilbert (1993) The Assent of Man: mental representation and the control of belief in Wegner and 
Pennebaker (eds) The Handbook of Mental Control 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
89 
 
Freed of the need to conform to his past, Spinoza was able to explore anything he chose. 
One of the areas he turned his considerable mental prowess to was the faults contained 
in the Cartesian approach. Spinoza argued that all ideas were first represented as true 
and only later (with effort) evaluated for veracity. Effectively Spinoza denied the parsing 
that Descartes put at the heart of his two step approach. Spinoza argued that 
comprehension and belief were a single step. That is to say, in order for somebody to 
understand something, belief is a necessary precondition. Effectively all information or 
ideas are first accepted as true, and then only sometimes evaluated as to their truth,  
once this process is completed a ‘corrected belief’ is constructed if necessary.  
Libraries 
Gilbert et al (1990, op cit) use the example of a library to draw out the differences 
between these two approaches. Imagine a library with several million volumes, of which 
only a few are works of fiction. The Cartesian approach to filing books would be to put a 
red tag on each volume of fiction and blue tag on each volume of non-fiction. Any new 
book that appeared in the library would be read, and then tagged as either fiction or non-
fiction.  Any book that is unread is simply present in the library until it is read.  
In contrast, a Spinozan library would work in a very different fashion. Under this approach 
a tag would be added to each volume of fiction but the non-fiction would be left 
unmarked. The ease of this system should be clear; it requires a lot less effort to run this 
system than the Cartesian approach. However, the risk is that if a new book arrives it will 
be seen as non-fiction.  
Gilbert et al note that under ideal conditions both systems produce the same outcome if 
allowed to run to conclusion. So if you pick up a copy of Darwin’s ‘The expression of 
emotions in man and animals’ and asked the Cartesian librarian what he knew about the 
book, he would glance at the tag and say non-fiction. The Spinozan librarian would do 
pretty much the same thing, concluding the book was non-fiction because of the absence 
of a tag.  
However, imagine sneaking a new book into the library, say the latest Patricia Cornwell 
thriller.  If you took the book to the librarian and asked them what they knew about the 
book, their response would reveal a lot about the underlying process governing the 
library’s approach to filing. For instance, the Cartesian librarian would say “I don’t know 
what sort of book that is. Come back later when it has been read and tagged 
appropriately”. The Spinozan librarian would glance up and see the absence of a tag and 
say “it doesn’t have a tag so it must be non-fiction” – an obviously incorrect assessment.  
A testing structure 
The picture below taken from Gilbert (1993) shows the essential differences between the 
two approaches, and also suggests a clever way of testing which of the two approaches 
has more empirical support.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
90 
 
Descartes vs. Spinoza: a question of belief 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Gilbert (1993)  
Say an idea is presented to the brain55, and then the person considering the idea is 
interrupted in some fashion. Under a Cartesian system, the person is left merely with an 
understanding of a false idea, but no belief in it. However, if people are better described 
by a Spinozan approach then interrupting the process should lead to a belief in the false 
idea. So giving people ideas or propositions and then interrupting them with another task 
should help to reveal whether people are Cartesian or Spinozan systems when it comes 
to beliefs.  
The empirical evidence 
It has long been known that distracting people can impact the belief they attach to 
arguments. For instance, in their 1994 review Petty et al56 report an experiment from 
1976 which clearly demonstrated the impact of distraction techniques57.  
To test the impact of distraction, students were exposed to a message arguing that tuition 
at their university should be cut in half. Students listened to the ideas which were 
presented over headphones. Some heard strong arguments, others heard relatively weak 
arguments. At the same time, the students were subjected to a distraction task which 
consisted of tracking the positions of Xs that were flashed on a screen in front of them.  
In the high distraction version of the task, the Xs flashed up at a fast pace, in the low 
distraction task the rate was reduced heavily.  
The results Petty et al found are shown in the chart below. When the message was 
weak, people who were highly distracted showed much more agreement with the 
message than did the people who only suffered mild distraction. When the message was 
strong and distraction was high, the students showed less agreement than when the 
message was strong and the distraction was low.  Distraction did exactly what it was 
meant to do... prevented people from concentrating on the important issue.  
 
 
                                            
55 This hints that we support a Spinozan view of the human mind. Descartes was famous for arguing the 
difference between the brain and the mind, Spinoza in contrast saw the two as impossible to  separate, 
they are two sides of the same coin from a Spinozan viewpoint. For more on this see Antonio Damasio’s 
first and third books, Descartes’ Error and Looking for Spinoza respectively.  
56 Petty, Cacioppo, Strathman and Priester (1994) To think or not to think, in Brock and Shavitt The 
Psychology of Persuasion 
57 Petty, Wells and Brock (1976) Distraction can enhance or reduce yielding to proganda, Journal of 
Personality and Social Psycholgy, 34 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
91 
 
Post message attitudes as a function of distraction and argument quality 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Weak arguments
Strong arguments
Low distraction
High distraction
 
Source: Petty, Wells and Brock (1976) 
Petty et al conclude “Distraction, then, is an especially useful technique when a person’s 
arguments are poor because even though people might be aware that some arguments 
were presented, they might be unaware that the arguments were not very compelling.” 
Something to bear in mind at your next meeting with brokers perhaps? The next 
time an analyst comes around and starts showing you pictures of the next generation of 
mobile phones, just stop and think about the quality of their investment arguments.  
Is there more direct evidence of our minds housing a Spinozan system when it comes to 
belief? Gilbert et al (1990, op cit) decided to investigate. They asked people to help them 
with an experiment concerning language acquisition in a natural environment. 
Participants were shown ostensibly Hopi words with an explanation (such as a monishna 
is a bat). They had to wait until the experimenter told them whether the word they had 
been given was actually the correct word in Hopi or whether it was a false statement.  
Subjects also had to listen out for a specific sound which if they heard required them to 
press a button. The tone sounded very shortly after the participant had been told whether 
the statement was true or false. This was aimed at interrupting the natural processing of 
information. Once they responded to the tone, the next Hopi word appeared preventing 
them from going back and reconsidering the previous item.  
When subjects were later asked about their beliefs, if they worked in a Spinozan way 
then people should recall false propositions as true more often after an interrupt than the 
rest of the time. As the chart below shows, this is exactly what Gilbert et al uncovered.  
% of words recognised by category  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
True as true
False as false
True as false
False as true
No task
Tone task
 
Source: Gilbert et al (1990) 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
92 
 
Interruption had no effect on the correction identification of a true proposition (55% when 
uninterrupted vs. 58% when interrupted).  However, interruption did significantly reduce 
the correct identification of false propositions (55% when uninterrupted vs. 35% when 
interrupted). Similarly one could look at the number of true-false reversals (the right side 
of the chart above) When false propositions were uninterrupted, they were misidentified 
as true 21% of the time, which was roughly the same rate as true propositions were 
identified as false. However, when interrupted the situation changes, false propositions 
were identified as true some 33%, significantly higher than the number of true 
propositions were identified as false (17%).  
In another test Gilbert et al (1993, op cit) showed that this habit of needing to believe in 
order to understand could have some disturbing consequences. They set up a study in 
which participants read crime reports with the goal of sentencing the perpetrators to 
prison. The subjects were told some of the statements they would read would be false 
and would appear on screen as red text, the true statements would be in black text.  
By design, the false statements in one case happened to exacerbate the crime in 
question; in the other case they attenuated the crimes. The statements were also shown 
crawling across the screen – much like the tickers and prices on bubble vision. Below the 
text was a second row of crawling numbers. Some of the subjects were asked to scan 
the second row for the number (5) and when they saw it, they were asked to press a 
button.  
At the end of experiment, subjects were asked to state what they thought represented a 
fair sentence for the crimes they had read about. The chart below shows that just like the 
previous example, interruption significantly reduced the recognition of false statements 
(69% vs. 34%), and increased the recognition of false statements as being true (23% vs. 
44%).  
% of statements recognised by category  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
True as true
False as false
True as false
False as true
Uninterrupted
Interrupted
 
Source: Gilbert et al (1993) 
The chart below shows the average recommended sentence depending on the degree of 
interruption. When the false statements were attenuating and processing was interrupted 
there wasn’t a huge difference in the recommended jail term. The interrupted sentences 
were around 4% lower than the uninterrupted ones. However, when the false statements 
were exacerbating and interruption occurred the recommended jail term was on average 
nearly 60% higher than in the uninterrupted case!  
 
 
 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
93 
 
Recommended jail terms (years) 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Uninterrupted
Interrupted
Extenuating
Exacerbating
 
Source: Gilbert et al (1993) 
Strategies to counteract naïve belief 
The thought that we seem to believe everything in order to understand it, is a more than 
a little disconcerting. It would seem to render us powerless to control our beliefs. 
However, the absence of direct control over our beliefs doesn’t necessarily imply we are 
at their mercy.  
Two potential strategies for countering our innate tendency to believe can be imagined. 
The first is what Gilbert (1993, op cit) calls ‘unbelieving’. That is, we can try to carry out 
the required analytic work to truly assess the veracity of an idea. This certainly appeals to 
the empiricist in me. My own personal viewpoint is that we should accept very little at 
face value and use evidence to assess how likely the proposition actually is.  
For example, we are often told that stock markets earnings can grow faster than nominal 
GDP over extended periods. Of course, in year to year terms there isn’t a close linkage 
between the two. However, in the long run earnings (and dividends) have grown 
substantially below the rate of nominal GDP growth (on average earnings have grown 1-
2% below the rate of nominal GDP; see Global Equity Strategy, 16 August 2002 Return 
of the Robber Barrons for more on this).  
Growth investing is another example. I don’t doubt that some growth investors are very 
successful. However, the empirical evidence shows that picking winners in terms of 
growth is exceptionally difficult and fraught with danger (in that buying expensive stocks 
with high embodied expectations obviously opens up considerable downside risk if reality 
falls short of expectations). In contrast, buying cheap stocks offers a margin of safety 
against disappointment. (See Global Equity Strategy, 16 March 2005, Bargain Hunter for 
more details).  
So regularly confronting beliefs with empirical reality is one way of trying to beat 
the Spinozan system. However, ‘unbelieving’ is a risky strategy since it relies on you 
having the cognitive wherewithal to be on your guard. Gilbert et al have shown that 
cognitive load, pressure and time constraints all undermine our ability to reject 
false beliefs.  
The second potential belief control mechanism is called ‘exposure control’. This is a far 
more draconian approach than ‘unbelieving’. False beliefs can be avoided by avoiding 
all beliefs, just as a dieter who loves doughnuts may choose to avoid shops that 
sell doughnuts, we can try to avoid sources of information that lead us to hold 
false beliefs. This is a conservative strategy that errs on the side of exclusion, it 
excludes false beliefs, but it may also exclude some true beliefs. However, it doesn’t 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
94 
 
suffer from the problems of overload, pressure or time constraints unlike the ‘unbelieving’ 
strategy.  
All of this suggests that a combination of these strategies is likely to be optimal. 
When you are really trying to assess the validity of an argument do your best to 
avoid distraction. Turn off your screens, put your phone on call forward, and try to 
cut yourself off from all the sources of noise. Of course, management and colleagues 
may well think you have taken leave of your sense as you sit there with your screens off, 
but try to ignore them too.  If you are likely to be distracted then either wait until later, 
when you can give the assessment the time and effort it requires or simply follow an 
exclusion strategy.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
95 
 
Sin 7 
Group decisions 
 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is left blank intentionally 
