 
 
 
 
 
DrKW Macro research 
Equity Strategy | Global 
 
The psychology of groups 
9 September 2004 
Global Equity Strategy 
Are two heads better than one? 
 
 
Online research: 
www.drkwresearch.com 
 
Bloomberg: 
DRKW<GO> 
Please refer to the Disclosure Appendix for all relevant disclosures and our 
disclaimer.  In respect of any compendium report covering six or more companies, 
all 
relevant 
disclosures 
are 
available 
on 
our 
website 
www.drkwresearch.com/disclosures
or by contacting the DrKW Research 
Department at the address below. 
 
Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited, Authorised and regulated by the Financial Services Authority and a Member Firm of the 
London Stock Exchange PO Box 560, 20 Fenchurch Street, London EC3P 3DB.  Telephone: +44 20 7623 8000 Telex: 916486 Registered in 
England No. 1767419 Registered Office: 20 Fenchurch Street, London EC3P 3DB.  A Member of the Dresdner Bank Group. 
 
James Montier 
+44 (0)20 7475 6821 
james.montier@drkw.com 
 
 
Do you set your asset allocation by committee? Or perhaps sit on a stock 
selection team? If so, then read on. Psychologists have documented that group 
decisions are often amongst the worst decisions made. We explore why groups 
are prone to make mistakes, and offer some solutions for mitigating these errors. 
 
► The eternal hope is that groups come together, exchange ideas, and reach sensible 
conclusions. The reality of group behaviour is frequently very different. Psychologists 
have documented that on average groups are more likely to amplify rather than alleviate 
decision-making biases. 
► Groups tend to reduce the variance of opinions, and lead members to have more 
confidence in their decisions after group discussions (without improving accuracy).  They 
also tend to be very bad at uncovering hidden information. Indeed, members of groups 
frequently enjoy enhanced competency and credibility in the eyes of their peers if they 
provide information that agrees with the group view! 
► Groups also have a tendency to suffer cascades. Under cascades members abandon 
their individual information, choosing to agree with others, because they think they know 
more. 
► Groups are also at risk of suffering polarization and possibly groupthink. Polarization 
occurs when members of a group end up in a more extreme position in line with their 
original beliefs after discussion with the group. Groupthink is an extreme version of 
polarization leading to all sorts of problems. 
► Beating the biases of group behaviour is every bit as difficult as overcoming individual 
biases. However, secret ballots may help reduce social pressures to conform. The use of 
devil’s advocates may help (but they must believe the case they are arguing, and run the 
risk of being ostracized). Having respect for the other group members can help, but we all 
know how difficult that can be!  

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
98 
 
Are two heads better than one? 
Do you conduct your asset allocation via committee? Or perhaps you sit on a stock 
selection committee? If so perhaps you should read on. Psychologists have spent many 
years documenting the fact that group decisions are amongst the worst decisions ever 
made. Effectively endorsing the view that committees are groups of people who keep 
minutes but waste hours! The key reason for this appears to be that when we come 
together as a group we have to deal not only with our own biases, but also to cope with 
everyone else’s biases as well. 
The well-informed reader might point out that James Surowiecki has recently published a 
book entitled The Wisdom of Crowds58. The book purports to show that “the many are 
smarter than the few”. The basic idea of the book is that groups outperform individuals in 
decision-making. Surely this is in direct contradiction of my opening paragraph?  
However, Surowiecki is correct that groups outperform individuals but only under a very 
strict set of circumstances. Psychologists have shown that statistical groups can 
outperform individuals and deliberative groups. A statistical group effectively involves 
asking a large number of people what they think the answer is and taking the mean. 
Such groups have a good track record when it comes to forecasting.  
For instance, when judging the number of beans in a jar, the group average is almost 
always better than the vast majority of the individual members. In one such experiment, a 
group of 56 students was asked about a jar containing 850 beans; the group estimate 
was 871, a better guess than all but one of the students59 .  
In another experiment, a group was asked to rank ten piles of buckshot, which were only 
minimally different in size from each other. The group’s guess was 94.5% accurate, far 
more so than that of almost all the group members60.   
However, for a statistical group to be a useful device three conditions must be met:- 
1) People must be unaffected by others’ decisions (effectively their errors must be 
uncorrelated) 
2) The probability of being correct must be independent of the probability of everyone 
else being correct 
3) The participants must be unaffected by their own vote possibly being decisive.  
If these conditions are broken the group’s advantage is quickly lost. This is a particular 
cause for concern from a behavioural point of view. Critics of behavioural finance argue 
that if one person is overoptimistic and one is pessimistic then their mistakes cancel out. 
One of the foundations of behavioural finance is that people, generally, err in a similar 
fashion. Hence, the mistakes they make are highly unlikely to be uncorrelated.  
In addition, groups can be subject to anchors just like individuals (see Global Equity 
Strategy, 27 August). An anecdotal story may help illustrate this point. Recently, my 
colleagues and I went to the Oval to watch England vs. the West Indies. At about 5pm, 
we decided to run a book on the total score for England’s first innings. The run total was 
around 250 at that point. I went first and chose 350; the subsequent bets were 
surprisingly tightly clustered around the initial estimate. The group was at risk of 
anchoring. The eventual outturn was an England first innings of 470!  
                                            
58 A client and friend sent me a signed copy of this book. Thank you Rob. 
59 Surowiecki (2004) The wisdom of crowd 
60 Bruce (1935) Group judgements in the field of lifted weights and visual discrimination, Journal of 
Psychology 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
99 
 
The other weak spot of statistical groups appears to be when the members have no idea 
of the answer to the question. For instance, Professor Sunstein61 asked his fellow faculty 
the weight, in pounds, of the fuel cell that powers the space shuttle. The actual answer is 
4 million pounds. The median response was 200,000; the mean was 55,790,555 (driven 
by a single outlier). Both answers are wildly inaccurate.  
However statistical groups are not a good description of the way in which the average 
asset allocation committee reaches decisions. Instead, the stereotypical asset allocation 
committee is formed of the regional heads of equity (i.e. Europe, US, Japan and perhaps 
Global), the head of fixed income, the CIO and an economist/strategist. This group then 
sits down and debates the issues before arriving at a conclusion. This is the prototypical 
set up for what psychologists call deliberative groups.  
The eternal hope is that such groups will come together, exchange ideas, each bringing 
something different to the discussion. The aim is of course to uncover all the information 
the group has. If one member has an irrelevant anchor, then the hope is that the group 
will expose this anchor, hence beating the bias.  
However, the reality of group behaviour is very different. As MacCoun62 notes “Groups 
generally can be expected to amplify rather than correcting individual bias” (sic). For 
instance, psychologists have shown that, in general, deliberation tends to reduce 
variance. After talking together, the members of a group will tend to reach a consensus; 
hence the variance of views is diminished.  
Additionally, group discussion tends to lead to group members having more confidence in 
their decisions after the group deliberations63. However, sadly, this increased confidence 
is not matched by increased accuracy. People simply become more sure about the views 
they hold rather than enjoying an improvement in performance.  
This confidence seems to be driven by the simple repetition of the view. The more you 
hear a view, the more you tend to have confidence that the view is correct!  
Sunstein (op cit) notes “Groups have been found to amplify, rather than to attenuate, 
reliance on the representativeness heuristic; to reflect even larger framing effects; to 
show more confidence than individuals; ... In addition, groups demonstrate essentially the 
same level of reliance on the availability heuristic”64.  
Deliberative groups also show an alarming inability to uncover information that isn’t 
common knowledge, and instead end up centred on the knowledge that is easily 
available to all the group members.  
Sunstein cites a wonderful example from Hightower and Sayeed65: 
The purpose of the study was to see how groups might collaborate to make 
a personnel decision. Resumes for three candidates, applying for a 
marketing manager position, were placed before group members. The 
attributes of the candidates were rigged by the experimenters so that one 
applicant was clearly the best for the job described. Packets of information 
                                            
61 Sunstein (2004) Group judgements: deliberation, statistical means and information markets, Chicago 
Law School working paper 
62 MacCoun (2002) Comparing micro and macro rationality, in Judgements, decisions and public policy 
(ed) Gowda and Fox (also available from http://ist-socrates.berkeley.edu/~maccoun/index.html#B) 
63 Heath and Gonzalez (1995) Interaction with others increases decision confidence but not decision 
quality, Organisation behaviour and human decision process 305 
64 References include Stasson et (1988) Group consensus approaches to cognitive bias task, Japanese 
Psychological Research 68; Sniezek and Henry (1989) Accuracy and confidence in group judgement, 
Organisational behaviour and human decision processes; 
65 Hightower and Sayeed (1995) The impact of computer-mediated communication systems on biased 
group discussion, Computers in Human Behaviour 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
100 
 
were given to subjects, each containing a subset of information from the 
resumes, so that each group member had only part of the relevant 
information. The groups consisted of three people, some operating face-to-
face, some operating on-line. Almost none of the deliberating groups made 
what was conspicuously the right choice. The reason is simple: They failed 
to share information in a way that would permit the group to make that 
choice. Members tended to share positive information about the winning 
candidate and negative information about the losers. They suppressed 
negative information about the winner and positive information about the 
losers. Hence their statements served to “reinforce the market toward group 
consensus rather than add complications and fuel debate.”  
The general finding from a wide variety of such experiments is that unshared information 
is highly likely to be omitted from the discussion. Instead, members of the group will tend 
to concentrate on shared information leading to a hardening of view, creating an anchor 
for the subsequent discussions.  
Why are groups so bad at uncovering unshared information? In part it is a function of the 
statistical fact that shared information is more likely to be discussed and repeated. Of 
course, this will tend to influence the individuals in the group, and hence influence the 
group’s eventual outcome.  
The other factor that helps explain why groups are so bad at sharing information 
concerns social pressure. Those who perceive themselves to be of a relatively low status 
(admittedly not a major problem for many in our industry!) are particularly likely to refrain 
from sharing unique information66. They are scared of looking stupid in front of their 
colleagues. The reputational risk is simply too high for low status members to chance 
sharing information if it doesn’t conform to the group67.  
Wittenbaum et al68 have also shown those who share information which confirms the 
group’s views are seen as competent and more credible by their peers and by 
themselves! A situation Wittenbaum et al call mutual enhancement.  
The chart below shows the result of one of Wittenbaum et al’s experiments. Once again 
information over candidates for a job was the topic. After hearing from the various 
members of the group, people were asked to rate the other members and themselves 
using a 0-9 scale (strongly disagree to strongly agree) on the following two questions (i) I 
feel competent at determining the better job candidate, (ii)  the others are competent at 
determining the better job candidate.  
Evidence of mutual enhancement would arise if participants evaluated themselves and 
the others more favourably when the information was common/shared by the group (i.e 
they don’t reveal unique information). And, when people relied on unique information, 
they rate themselves lower and the group would also rate them lower rather than on 
unique information. That was exactly what was uncovered.  
 
 
 
                                            
66 Wittenbaum and Park (2001) The collective preference for shared information, Current directions in 
psychological science, 10 and Stasser and Titus (2003) Hidden profiles: a brief history, Psychological 
Inquiry, 14 
67 We will explore a related issue on obedience to authority in a future weekly. 
68 Wittenbaum, Hubbell and Zuckerman (1999) Mutual Enhancement: Toward an understanding of the 
collective preference for shared information, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
101 
 
Communication bias: Evaluation ratings as a function of the type of information 
5
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6
6.2
6.4
6.6
6.8
7
Shared
Unshared
Self
Others
 
Source: Wittenbaum et al (1999) 
The third major problem that groups encounter is the tendency to suffer cascades. We 
have discussed cascades in the context of markets before (see Global Equity Strategy, 
13 January 2004 and 19 May 2004). However, cascades can also affect group decision 
processes.  
A cascade is a situation whereby an individual’s action is potentially independent of their 
private information, and totally dependent upon the observation of other’s actions and/or 
words.  
One of the key features of cascades is their tendency to exhibit idiosyncrasy. That is to 
say the behaviour resulting from signals of just the first few individuals drastically affects 
behaviour of numerous followers. Effectively, cascades are highly path dependent.  
Within the context of group discussions, once an opinion has been voiced then it 
becomes increasingly unlikely that others will argue against it. Not only for the social 
reasons outlined above, but because they might assume that the person voicing the 
belief has more information than they do.  
Cascades have proven easy to create in laboratory environments69. Players are told that 
one of two pots containing three balls is being used. One pot contains two red and one 
white ball (pot A), the other two white and one red ball (pot B). Players are selected in a 
random order to announce which pot is being used after having received a private signal 
in the form of a draw from the pot.  
The results from one of their experiments are shown below. The pot used was B. 
However, players 3 onwards decided that the other players knew more than they did and 
hence ignored their private signal, despite the fact that going with the private signal would 
be correct on 2/3rds of occasions!  
Cascade creation: Actual pot used B 
Player 
1
2
3 
4 
5
6
Private signal 
a
a
b 
b 
b
b
Decision 
A
A
A 
A 
A
A
Source: Anderson and Holt (2004) 
The fourth hurdle that deliberative groups must attempt to overcome is the risk of group 
polarization and possibly groupthink. Group polarization is the tendency for members of a 
group to end up in a more extreme position in line with their original beliefs after talking to 
one another. The increased confidence in view mentioned earlier, begins to create 
                                            
69 For a very up to date survey see Anderson and Holt (2004) Information Cascade Experiments, 
forthcoming in The handbook of results in experimental economics, Smith and Plott (Ed.) 

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
102 
 
feedback into the extremity of view, generally creating a loop of increased confidence in 
more and more extreme views.  
Even more extreme than group polarization is groupthink. The term was coined by Irving 
Janis in 1972. In his original work Janis cited the Vietnam War and the Bay of Pigs 
invasion as prime examples of the groupthink mentality. However modern examples are 
all too prevalent. The recent Senate report on the intelligence gathering by the CIA over 
the war in Iraq explicitly accused the CIA of displaying many of the elements of 
groupthink.  
Groupthink is often characterised by: 
► A tendency to examine too few alternatives 
► A lack of critical assessment of each other’s ideas 
► A high degree of selectivity in information gathering 
► A lack of contingency plans 
► Poor decisions are often rationalized 
► The group has an illusion of invulnerability and shared morality 
► True feelings and beliefs are suppressed 
► An illusion of unanimity is maintained 
► Mind guards (essentially information sentinels) may be appointed to protect the group 
from negative information 
Beating the biases 
Can these various problems be overcome? As with all biases the solutions are never 
easy to implement. However, three possible routes to reducing group biases are: 
Secret ballots 
The use of secret ballots obviously reduces the risk of group members coming under 
social pressure. So perhaps before the meeting starts members should write down their 
views and their preference for asset allocation, then count the votes, and debate the 
outcome if it is really necessary - bearing in mind the dangers inherent in this process. 
Devil’s advocates 
Appointing a devil’s advocate70  may help. However, all too often the person selected 
may not truly believe the role they are asked to play, and hence not really try too hard to 
prevent the group reaching its consensus decision. Selecting prickly disagreeable 
individuals with a strong contrarian view and the ability and desire to argue on almost 
anything would be perfect. But such individuals are hard to find, and don’t fit easily into 
most corporate cultures.  
Respect for other group members 
The other factor that can help reduce the dangers of group decisions is when the group 
members are acknowledged to be experts in their field, and hence disparate viewpoints 
are easier to deal with and unshared information may be easier to uncover. However, all 
too often people tend to believe that they know best on almost every subject and hence 
tend not to display respect for the views of others. 
 
                                            
70 The term comes from the process of canonization. When the Pope considers conferring sainthood, a 
devil’s advocate is appointed unofficially to argue against the decision.   

 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005
 
103 
[11646 : 100436]
 
Disclosure appendix  
Disclosures under US regulations 
 
The relevant research analyst(s), as named on the front cover of this report, certify that (a) all of the views expressed in 
this research report accurately reflect their personal views about the securities and companies mentioned in this report; 
and (b) no part of their compensation was, is, or will be directly or indirectly related to the specific recommendation(s) or 
views expressed by them contained in this report. 
Any forecasts or price targets shown for companies and/or securities discussed in this report may not be achieved due to 
multiple risk factors including without limitation market volatility, sector volatility, corporate actions, the unavailability of 
complete and accurate information and/or the subsequent transpiration that underlying assumptions made by DrKW or by 
other sources relied upon in the report were inapposite. 
Recommendation history charts 
Past performance is not an indicator of future performance. 
 
 
Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Research – Recommendation definition 
(Except as otherwise noted, expected performance over next 12 months) 
Buy: 
10% or greater increase in share price 
 
Sell: 
10% or more decrease in share price 
Add: 
5-10% increase in share price 
 
Reduce: 
5-10% decrease in share price 
Hold: 
+5%/-5% variation in share price 
 
 
 
 
Distribution of DrKW equity recommendations as of 30 Sept 2005 
 
All covered companies
Companies where a DrKW company has provided 
investment banking services (in the last 12 months)
Buy/Add 
284
49%
45
16%
Hold 
204
35%
24
12%
Sell/Reduce 
97
17%
12
12%
Total 
585
81
Source: DrKW 
Additional disclosures under other non-US regulations 
The disclosures under US regulations above should be read together with these additional disclosures. 
 
Recipients should note that DrKW may have submitted a draft of this report (with recommendation/rating, price 
target/spread and summary of conclusions removed) to the relevant issuer(s) for factual review and that amendments 
may have been made following that review. 
In respect of any compendium report covering six or more listed companies, please refer to the following website for all 
relevant disclosures: www.drkwresearch.com/disclosures/ 
 
Disclaimer 
This report has been prepared by Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein, by the specific legal entity named on the cover or 
inside cover page. 
 
United Kingdom: This report is a communication made, or approved for communication in the UK, by Dresdner Kleinwort 
Wasserstein Securities Limited (authorised and regulated by the Financial Services Authority and a Member Firm of the 
London Stock Exchange). It is directed exclusively to market counterparties and intermediate customers. It is not directed 
at private customers and any investments or services to which the report may relate are not available to private 
customers. No persons other than a market counterparty or an intermediate customer should read or rely on any 
information in this report. Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited does not deal for, or advise or otherwise 
offer any investment services to private customers. 
European Economic Area: Where this report has been produced by a legal entity outside of the EEA, the report has been 
re-issued by Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited for distribution into the EEA. 
United States: Where this report has been approved for distribution in the US, such distribution is by either: (i) Dresdner 
Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities LLC (DrKWS LLC); or (ii) other Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein companies to US 
Institutional Investors and Major US Institutional Investors only; or (iii) if the report relates to non-US exchange traded 
futures, Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Limited (DrKWL). DrKWS LLC, or in case (iii) DrKWL, accepts responsibility for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Seven Sins of Fund Management 
18 November 2005 
 
104 
[11646 : 100436]
this report in the US. Any US persons wishing to effect a transaction through Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein (a) in any 
security mentioned in this report may only do so through DrKWS LLC, telephone: (+1 212) 429 2000; or (b) in a non-US 
exchange traded future may only do so through DrKWL, telephone: (+ 11 44) 20 7623 8000). 
Singapore: This research report is being distributed for Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein ("DrKW") in Singapore by 
Dresdner Bank AG, Singapore Branch, purely as a resource and for general informational purposes only, and is intended 
for general circulation. Accordingly, this research report does not take into account the specific investment objectives, 
financial situation, or needs of any particular person and is exempted from the same by Regulation 34 of the Financial 
Advisers Regulations ("FAR") (as required under Section 27 of the Financial Advisers Act (Cap. 110) of Singapore 
("FAA")). 
Hong Kong:  This report is being distributed for Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein in Hong Kong by Dresdner Kleinwort 
Wasserstein Securities Limited.  Unless permitted to do so by the securities laws of Hong Kong, no person may issue or 
have in its possession for the purposes of issue this report, whether in Hong Kong or elsewhere, which is directed at, or 
the contents of which are likely to be accessed or read by, the public in Hong Kong, other than with respect to the 
securities referred to in this report which are or are intended to be disposed of only to persons outside Hong Kong or only 
to "professional investors" within the meaning of the Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap.571) of Hong Kong and any 
rules made thereunder, and to persons whose ordinary business is to buy and sell shares or debentures. 
Japan: Where this report is being distributed in Japan, such distribution is by either (i) Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein 
(Japan) Limited Tokyo Branch (DrKWJ, registered and regulated by the Financial Services Agency and General Trading 
Participant of TSE, Regular Transaction Participant and Transaction Participant in Futures Transaction of OSE, 
Participant of JASDAQ) to Japanese investors excluding private customers or (ii) other Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein 
companies, to entities falling within Article 2, Paragraph 1 of the Enforcement Order for Law Concerning Foreign 
Securities Firms act. Any Japanese persons not falling within (ii) wishing to effect a transaction through Dresdner 
Kleinwort Wasserstein in any security mentioned in this report may only do so through DrKWJ, telephone: (+ 813) 6230 
6000. 
Australia: Neither Dresdner Bank AG ("DBAG") nor Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited ("DrKWSL") holds 
an Australian financial services licence.  This report is being distributed in Australia to wholesale customers pursuant to an 
Australian financial services licence exemption for DBAG under Class Order 04/1313 or for DrKWSL under Class Order 
03/1099.  DBAG is regulated by BaFin under the laws of Germany and DrKWSL is regulated by the Financial Services 
Authority under the laws of the United Kingdom, both of which differ from Australian laws. 
This report contains general information only, does not take account of the specific circumstances of any recipient and 
should not be relied upon as authoritative or taken in substitution for the exercise of judgment by any recipient. Each 
recipient should consider the appropriateness of any investment decision having regard to their own circumstances, the 
full range of information available and appropriate professional advice. The information and opinions in this report 
constitute judgment as at the date of this report, have been compiled or arrived at from sources believed to be reliable and 
in good faith (but no representation or warranty, express or implied, is made as to their accuracy, completeness or 
correctness) and are subject to change without notice. DrKW may amend, supplement or update the contents of this 
report in such form and in such timescales as DrKW deems appropriate. Recommendations and opinions herein reflect 
DrKW's expectations over the 12 month period following publication from the perspective of long-only investment clients. 
DrKW reserves the right to express different or contrary recommendations and opinions for different timescales or for 
other types of investment client. This report does not constitute or form part of, and should not be construed as, any offer 
for sale or subscription of, or any invitation to offer to buy or subscribe for, any securities, nor should it or any part of it 
form the basis of, or be relied on in any connection with, any contract or commitment whatsoever. DrKW accepts no 
liability whatsoever for any loss or damage arising from any use of this report or its contents. Whilst DrKW may provide 
hyperlinks to websites of entities mentioned in this report, the inclusion of a link does not imply that DrKW endorses, 
recommends or approves any material on the linked page or accessible from it. DrKW accepts no responsibility 
whatsoever for any such material, nor for any consequences of its use. This report is for the use of the addressees only, is 
supplied to you solely in your capacity as an investment professional or knowledgeable and experienced investor for your 
information and may not be reproduced, redistributed or passed on to any other person or published, in whole or in part, 
for any purpose, without the prior, written consent of DrKW. DrKW may distribute reports such as this in hard copy, 
electronically or by Voiceblast. DrKW and/or any of its clients may undertake or have undertaken transactions for their 
own account in the securities mentioned in this report or any related investments prior to your receipt of it. DrKW 
specifically draws recipients attention to the disclosures contained in the Disclosure Appendix but notes that, excluding (i) 
DrKWS LLC and (ii) the research analyst(s) responsible for this report unless specifically addressed in the "Disclosures 
under US regulations": (a) DrKW and its directors, officers, representatives and employees may have positions in or 
options on the securities mentioned in this report or any related investments or may buy, sell or offer to buy or sell such 
securities or any related investments as principal or agent on the open market or otherwise; and (b) DrKW may conduct, 
solicit and/or engage in other investment and/or commercial banking business (including without limitation loans, debt 
securities and/or derivative, currency and commodity transactions) with the issuers or relating to the securities mentioned 
in this report. Accordingly, information may be available to DrKW, which is not reflected in this report or the disclosures. In 
this notice “DrKW” means Dresdner Bank AG and/or Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited and any of their 
affiliated or associated companies and their directors, officers, representatives or employees and/or any persons 
connected with them.  Additional information on the contents of this report is available at www.drkwresearch.com 
and on request.  
 
© Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited 2005 
 
