Foreword
I
Jim has given round six of these lectures on volatility modeling at the
Courant Institute of New York University, slowly purifying these notes. I
witnessed and became addicted to their slow maturation from the ﬁrst time
he jotted down these equations during the winter of 2000, to the most recent
one in the spring of 2006. It was similar to the progressive distillation of
good alcohol: exactly seven times; at every new stage you can see the text
gaining in crispness, clarity, and concision. Like Jim’s lectures, these chapters
are to the point, with maximal simplicity though never less than warranted
by the topic, devoid of ﬂuff and side distractions, delivering the exact subject
without any attempt to boast his (extraordinary) technical skills.
The class became popular. By the second year we got yelled at by the
university staff because too many nonpaying practitioners showed up to the
lecture, depriving the (paying) students of seats. By the third or fourth year,
the material of this book became a quite standard text, with Jim G.’s lecture
notes circulating among instructors. His treatment of local volatility and
stochastic models became the standard.
As colecturers, Jim G. and I agreed to attend each other’s sessions, but
as more than just spectators—turning out to be colecturers in the literal
sense, that is, synchronously. He and I heckled each other, making sure
that not a single point went undisputed, to the point of other members of
the faculty coming to attend this strange class with disputatious instructors
trying to tear apart each other’s statements, looking for the smallest hole in
the arguments. Nor were the arguments always dispassionate: students soon
got to learn from Jim my habit of ordering white wine with read meat; in
return, I pointed out clear deﬁciencies in his French, which he pronounces
with a sometimes incomprehensible Scottish accent. I realized the value of
the course when I started lecturing at other universities. The contrast was
such that I had to return very quickly.
II
The difference between Jim Gatheral and other members of the quant
community lies in the following: To many, models provide a representation
xxi

xxii
FOREWORD
of asset price dynamics, under some constraints. Business school ﬁnance
professors have a tendency to believe (for some reason) that these provide
a top-down statistical mapping of reality. This interpretation is also shared
by many of those who have not been exposed to activity of risk-taking, or
the constraints of empirical reality.
But not to Jim G. who has both traded and led a career as a quant. To
him, these stochastic volatility models cannot make such claims, or should
not make such claims. They are not to be deemed a top-down dogmatic
representation of reality, rather a tool to insure that all instruments are
consistently priced with respect to each other–that is, to satisfy the golden
rule of absence of arbitrage. An operator should not be capable of deriving
a proﬁt in replicating a ﬁnancial instrument by using a combination of other
ones. A model should do the job of insuring maximal consistency between,
say, a European digital option of a given maturity, and a call price of
another one. The best model is the one that satisﬁes such constraints while
making minimal claims about the true probability distribution of the world.
I recently discovered the strength of his thinking as follows. When, by
the ﬁfth or so lecture series I realized that the world needed Mandelbrot-style
power-law or scalable distributions, I found that the models he proposed of
fudging the volatility surface was compatible with these models. How? You
just need to raise volatilities of out-of-the-money options in a speciﬁc way,
and the volatility surface becomes consistent with the scalable power laws.
Jim Gatheral is a natural and intuitive mathematician; attending his lec-
ture you can watch this effortless virtuosity that the Italians call sprezzatura.
I see more of it in this book, as his awful handwriting on the blackboard is
greatly enhanced by the aesthetics of LaTeX.
—Nassim Nicholas Taleb1
June, 2006
1Author, Dynamic Hedging and Fooled by Randomness.
