Preface
E
ver since the advent of the Black-Scholes option pricing formula, the
study of implied volatility has become a central preoccupation for both
academics and practitioners. As is well known, actual option prices rarely
if ever conform to the predictions of the formula because the idealized
assumptions required for it to hold don’t apply in the real world. Conse-
quently, implied volatility (the volatility input to the Black-Scholes formula
that generates the market price) in general depends on the strike and the
expiration of the option. The collection of all such implied volatilities is
known as the volatility surface.
This book concerns itself with understanding the volatility surface; that
is, why options are priced as they are and what it is that analysis of stock
returns can tell as about how options ought to be priced.
Pricing is consistently emphasized over hedging, although hedging and
replication arguments are often used to generate results. Partly, that’s
because pricing is key: How a claim is hedged affects only the width of the
resulting distribution of returns and not the expectation. On average, no
amount of clever hedging can make up for an initial mispricing. Partly, it’s
because hedging in practice can be complicated and even more of an art
than pricing.
Throughout the book, the importance of examining different dynamical
assumptions is stressed as is the importance of building intuition in general.
The aim of the book is not to just present results but rather to provide
the reader with ways of thinking about and solving practical problems
that should have many other areas of application. By the end of the book,
the reader should have gained substantial intuition for the latest theory
underlying options pricing as well as some feel for the history and practice
of trading in the equity derivatives markets. With luck, the reader will also
be infected with some of the excitement that continues to surround the
trading, marketing, pricing, hedging, and risk management of derivatives.
As its title implies, this book is written by a practitioner for practitioners.
Amongst other things, it contains a detailed derivation of the Heston
model and explanations of many other popular models such as SVJ, SVJJ,
SABR, and CreditGrades. The reader will also ﬁnd explanations of the
characteristics of various types of exotic options from the humble barrier
xxiii

xxiv
PREFACE
option to the super exotic Napoleon. One of the themes of this book
is the representation of implied volatility in terms of a weighted average
over all possible future volatility scenarios. This representation is not only
explained but is applied to help understand the impact of different modeling
assumptions on the shape and dynamics of volatility surfaces—a topic of
fundamental interest to traders as well as quants. Along the way, various
practical results and tricks are presented and explained. Finally, the hot topic
of volatility derivatives is exhaustively covered with detailed presentations
of the latest research.
Academics may also ﬁnd the book useful not just as a guide to the current
state of research in volatility modeling but also to provide practical context
for their work. Practitioners have one huge advantage over academics: They
never have to worry about whether or not their work will be interesting to
others. This book can thus be viewed as one practitioner’s guide to what is
interesting and useful.
In short, my hope is that the book will prove useful to anyone interested
in the volatility surface whether academic or practitioner.
Readers familiar with my New York University Courant Institute lecture
notes will surely recognize the contents of this book. I hope that even
aﬁcionados of the lecture notes will ﬁnd something of extra value in the
book. The material has been expanded; there are more and better ﬁgures;
and there’s now an index.
The lecture notes on which this book is based were originally targeted
at graduate students in the ﬁnal semester of a three-semester Master’s
Program in Financial Mathematics. Students entering the program have
undergraduate degrees in quantitative subjects such as mathematics, physics,
or engineering. Some are part-time students already working in the industry
looking to deepen their understanding of the mathematical aspects of their
jobs, others are looking to obtain the necessary mathematical and ﬁnancial
background for a career in the ﬁnancial industry. By the time they reach the
third semester, students have studied ﬁnancial mathematics, computing and
basic probability and stochastic processes.
It follows that to get the most out of this book, the reader should have
a level of familiarity with options theory and ﬁnancial markets that could
be obtained from Wilmott (2000), for example. To be able to follow the
mathematics, basic knowledge of probability and stochastic calculus such as
could be obtained by reading Neftci (2000) or Mikosch (1999) are required.
Nevertheless, my hope is that a reader willing to take the mathematical
results on trust will still be able to follow the explanations.

Preface
xxv
HOW THIS BOOK IS ORGANIZED
The ﬁrst half of the book from Chapters 1 to 5 focuses on setting up the
theoretical framework. The latter chapters of the book are more oriented
towards practical applications. The split is not rigorous, however, and
there are practical applications in the ﬁrst few chapters and theoretical
constructions in the last chapter, reﬂecting that life, at least the life of a
practicing quant, is not split into neat boxes.
Chapter 1 provides an explanation of stochastic and local volatility;
local variance is shown to be the risk-neutral expectation of instantaneous
variance, a result that is applied repeatedly in later chapters. In Chapter 2,
we present the still supremely popular Heston model and derive the Heston
European option pricing formula. We also show how to simulate the Heston
model.
In Chapter 3, we derive a powerful representation for implied volatility
in terms of local volatility. We apply this to build intuition and derive some
properties of the implied volatility surface generated by the Heston model
and compare with the empirically observed SPX surface. We deduce that
stochastic volatility cannot be the whole story.
In Chapter 4, we choose speciﬁc numerical values for the parameters
of the Heston model, speciﬁcally ρ = −1 as originally studied by Heston
and Nandi. We demonstrate that an approximate formula for implied
volatility derived in Chapter 3 works particularly well in this limit. As
a result, we are able to ﬁnd parameters of local volatility and stochastic
volatility models that generate almost identical European option prices.
We use these parameters repeatedly in subsequent chapters to illustrate the
model-dependence of various claims.
In Chapter 5, we explore the modeling of jumps. First we show why
jumps are required. We then introduce characteristic function techniques
and apply these to the computation of implied volatilities in models with
jumps. We conclude by showing that the SVJ model (stochastic volatility
with jumps in the stock price) is capable of generating a volatility surface
that has most of the features of the empirical surface. Throughout, we build
intuition as to how jumps should affect the shape of the volatility surface.
In Chapter 6, we apply our work on jumps to Merton’s jump-to-ruin
model of default. We also explain the CreditGrades model. In passing, we
touch on capital structure arbitrage and offer the ﬁrst glimpse into the less
than ideal world of real trading, explaining how large losses were incurred
by market makers.
In Chapter 7, we examine the asymptotic properties of the volatility
surface showing that all models with stochastic volatility and jumps generate
volatility surfaces that are roughly the same shape. In Chapter 8, we show

xxvi
PREFACE
how the dynamics of volatility can be deduced from the time series properties
of volatility surfaces. We also show why it is that the dynamics of the
volatility surfaces generated by local volatility models are highly unrealistic.
In Chapter 9, we present various types of barrier option and show how
intuition may be developed for these by studying two simple limiting cases.
We test our intuition (successfully) by applying it to the relative valuation of
barrier options under stochastic and local volatility. The reﬂection principle
and the concepts of quasi-static hedging and put-call symmetry are presented
and applied.
In Chapter 10, we study in detail three actual exotic cliquet transactions
that happen to have matured so that we can explore both pricing and
ex post performance. Speciﬁcally, we study a locally capped and globally
ﬂoored cliquet, a reverse cliquet, and a Napoleon. Followers of the ﬁnancial
press no doubt already recognize these deal types as having been the cause
of substantial pain to some dealers.
Finally, in Chapter 11, the longest of all, we focus on the pricing
and hedging of claims whose underlying is quadratic variation. In so
doing, we will present some of the most elegant and robust results in
ﬁnancial mathematics, thereby explaining in part why the market in volatility
derivatives is surprisingly active and liquid.
—Jim Gatheral
