CHAPTER6
Modeling Default Risk
I
t’s clear from Chapter 5 that jumps are required to explain the shape
of the implied volatility surface. In the single-stock case, there is a much
more direct and obvious explanation for the volatility skew: default risk.
We shall see that if the credit spread—and so default risk—is high, implied
volatility skews can be extreme.
MERTON’S MODEL OF DEFAULT
As we have come to expect, Wilmott (2000) gives an excellent introduction
to the modeling of default risk. There are two broad types of default
risk model used by practitioners: so-called structural models and so-called
reduced form models. I found the following useful description by Jabairu
Stork on Wilmott.com:
A structural model (of ﬁrm default) postulates that default occurs
when some economic variable (like ﬁrm value) crosses some barrier
(like debt value), typically using a contingent claims model to
support this assertion and to ﬁnd the probability of default. Both
H-W and Creditgrades∗are models of this form.
A reduced form model models default as a random occur-
rence—there is no observable or latent variable which triggers the
default event, it just happens. The Dufﬁe and Singleton (1999)
model is a reduced form model. These models are easy to calibrate,
but because they lack any ability to explain why default happens,
I think they make most people nervous. Basically, you estimate an
intensity for the arrival of default (possibly as a function of time,
possibly as a stochastic process, possibly as a function of other
things.)
∗See Finkelstein (2002) and Lardy (2002).
74

Modeling Default Risk
75
The model introduced in Merton (1974) is the simplest possible
example of a reduced form model. It supposes that there some proba-
bility λ(t) per unit time of the stock price jumping to zero (the hazard
rate), whereupon default occurs. Jumps are independent of the stock price
process. Then, contingent claims must satisfy the jump diffusion valuation
equation (5.3) with E[J] = 0. It is particulary straightforward to value a
call option because for a call, V(SJ, t) = 0. Substitution into equation (5.3)
gives
∂V
∂t + 1
2σ 2 S2 ∂2V
∂S2 + rS∂V
∂S −rV −λ(t)

V −S ∂V
∂S

= 0
(6.1)
We immediately recognize equation (6.1) as the Black-Scholes equation
with a shifted interest rate r + λ. Its solution is of course the Black-Scholes
formula with this shifted rate.
The meaning of this shifted rate is particularly clear if we assume no
recovery (in the case of default) on the issuer’s bonds so that B(JS, t) = 0.
Then, the risky bond price B(t, T) must also satisfy equation (6.1) with the
solution
B(t, T) = e−
 T
t (r(s)+λ(s))ds
We identify the shifted rate r + λ with the yield (risk-free rate plus credit
spread) of a risky bond. The situation is a little more complicated (but not
too much more) if we allow some recovery R on default.
Intuition
It may at ﬁrst seem surprising that the Black-Scholes formula could be a
solution of an equation that has a jump to zero (the so-called jump to ruin)
in it. There is an economic reason for this, however.
Recall that the derivation of the Black-Scholes formula involves the
construction of a replicating portfolio for a call option involving just
stock and risk-free bonds. Suppose instead, we were to construct this
portfolio using stock and risky bonds. So long as there is no jump
to ruin, the derivation goes through as before and the portfolio is self-
ﬁnancing. If there is a jump to ruin, assuming no recovery on the bond,
both the bond and the stock jump to zero—the portfolio is still self-
ﬁnancing!
What would happen if we were to hedge a short call option position
using stock and risk-free bonds following the standard Black-Scholes hedg-
ing recipe (as most practitioners actually do)? We would be long stock and

76
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
short risk-free bonds and, in the case of default, the call would end up
worthless, the stock would be worthless, and we would get full recovery on
our risk-free bonds. In other words, on default, we would have a windfall
gain. On the other hand, relative to hedging with risky bonds, we would
forego the higher carry (or yield).
Implications for the Volatility Skew
All issuers of stock have some probability of defaulting. There is a very active
credit derivative market that prices default-risk (see Default-Risk.com for
background). Black-Scholes implied volatilities are computed by inserting
the risk-free rate into the Black-Scholes formula. However, as we just
showed, in Merton’s model, call option prices are correctly obtained by
substituting the risky rate into the Black-Scholes formula. This induces a
skew that can become extremely steep for short-dated options on stocks
whose issuers have high credit spreads.
In Figure 6.1, we graph the implied volatility for various issuer credit
spreads assuming that options are correctly priced using the Merton
model. We see that the downside skew that the model generates can be
extreme.
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.3
Logstrike
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Implied Volatility
FIGURE 6.1
Three-month implied volatilities from the Merton model assuming a
stock volatility of 20% and credit spreads of 100 bp (solid), 200 bp (dashed) and
300 bp (long-dashed).

Modeling Default Risk
77
CAPITAL STRUCTURE ARBITRAGE
Capital structure arbitrage is the term used to describe the fashion for
arbitraging equity claims against ﬁxed income and convertible claims. At
its most sophisticated, practitioners build elaborate models of the capital
structure of a company to determine the relative values of the various
claims—in particular, stock, bonds, and convertible bonds. At its simplest,
the trader looks to see if equity puts are cheaper than credit derivatives and
if so buys the one and sells the other. To understand this, we review put-call
parity.
Put-Call Parity
We saw previously that in the Merton model the value of an equity call
option is given by the Black-Scholes formula for a call with the risk-free
rate replaced by the risky rate. What about put options? To make the
previous arguments work, the put option would need to be worthless
after the jump to ruin occurs. That would be the case if the put in
question were to be written by the issuer of the stock. In that case, when
default occurs, assuming zero recovery, the put options would also be
worth nothing. So the Black-Scholes formula for a put with the risk-free
rate replaced by the risky rate does value put options written by the
issuer.
What about put options written by some default-free counterparty (for
example, an exchange)? When default occurs, this put option should be
worth the strike price. We already know how to value a call written by a
default-free counterparty; by deﬁnition, the issuer of a stock cannot default
on a call on his or her own stock, so the value of a call written by the issuer
of the stock equals the value of a call written by a default-free counterparty.
We obtain the value of a put by put-call parity: using risk-free bonds in the
case of the default-free counterparty and risky bonds in the case of the risky
counterparty.
Denoting the value of a risk-free put, call and bond by P0, C0, and B0
and the value of risky claims on the issuer (I) of the stock by PI, CI, and BI,
we obtain
P0 = C0 + KB0 −S (from put-call parity with risk-free bonds)
= CI + KB0 −S (risk-free and issuer-written calls have the same value)
= PI + S −KBI + KB0 −S (from put-call parity with risky bonds)
= PI + K(B0 −BI)

78
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
As we would expect, the risk-free put is worth more than the risky put.
The excess value is equal to the difference in risky and risk-free bond prices
(times the strike price). With maturity-independent rates and credit spreads
for clarity and setting t = 0, we obtain
B0 −BI = e−rT 
1 −e−λT
which is just the discounted probability of default in the Merton model.
In words, the extra value is the strike price times the (pseudo-) probability
that default occurs. This payoff is also more or less exactly the payoff of a
default put in the credit derivatives market.
The Arbitrage
Referring back to Figure 6.1, we see that the downside implied volatility
skew can be extreme for stocks whose issuers have high credit spreads.
Equity option market makers (until recently at least) made do with heuristic
rules to determine whether a skew looked reasonable or not; implied
volatility skews of the magnitude shown in Figure 6.1 seemed just too
extreme to be considered reasonable. Taking advantage of the market
maker’s lack of understanding, the trader buys an equity option on the
exchange at a ‘‘very high’’ (but, of course, insufﬁciently high) implied
volatility and sells a default put on the same stock in the credit derivatives
market locking in a risk-free return.
This actually happened and hedge funds were able to lock in risk-free
gains for a period of time. During this period, market makers saw what
were to them extremely steep volatility skews get even steeper and they lost
money.
Ultimately, skews became so steep that the hedge funds made money
risk-free the other way round—through put spreads. A popular trade for
a hedge fund was to buy one at-the-money put and sell two puts struck at
half the current stock price. As we can see from Figure 6.2, this strategy has
only positive payoffs so if this can be traded ﬂat or for a net credit, it is a
pure arbitrage.
The life of a market maker is not a happy one—it seems that graduate
degree level understanding is required to avoid getting arbitraged!
We see that there is a lower bound to the price of a put given by the
credit default swap market and an upper bound given by spread arbitrage.
To make this more concrete, consider the upper and lower bounds for a 0.5
strike one-year option with credit spreads of 100 bp, 200 bp and 300 bp
displayed in Table 6.1.

Modeling Default Risk
79
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Final stock price
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Payoff
FIGURE 6.2
Payoff of the 1 × 2 put spread combination: buy one put with strike
1.0 and sell two puts with strike 0.5.
TABLE 6.1
Upper and lower arbitrage bounds
for one-year 0.5 strike options for various credit
spreads (at-the-money volatility is 20%).
Credit Spread (bp) Lower Bound Upper Bound
250
0.0123
0.0398
500
0.0244
0.0398
750
0.0361
0.0398
Assuming 20% at-the-money volatility, the upper bound is computed
as half the value of an at-the-money option which is 0.0398 in each case.
On the other hand, the lower bounds are just the present value of the
strike price∗times the probability of default. We see that the lower bound
increases steadily towards the upper bound as the credit spread increases for
ﬁxed at-the-money implied volatility. It’s easy to see how a market maker
could have exceeded the upper bound given the steady increase in skews.
LOCAL AND IMPLIED VOLATILITY
IN THE JUMP-TO-RUIN MODEL
As noted already, the value of a call option is given by the Black-Scholes
formula with the interest rate shifted by the hazard rate.
∗We are still assuming zero rates so the PV factor is always one.

80
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
We recall formula (1.6) for local volatility from Chapter 1:
σ 2
loc(K, T, S) =
∂C
∂T
1
2 K2 ∂2C
∂K2
(6.2)
Because the Black-Scholes formula C for a call option is linearly
homogenous in the stock price S and the strike price K, we have the
relation
C = S ∂C
∂S + K ∂C
∂K
It follows that
K2 ∂2C
∂K2 = S2 ∂2C
∂S2
Also, in the jump-to-ruin case with zero interest rates and dividends, we
have
∂C
∂T = 1
2 σ 2 S2 ∂2C
∂S2 + λ S ∂C
∂S −λ C
where σ is the volatility (diffusion coefﬁcient) and λ is the hazard rate.
Rewriting this in terms of derivatives with respect to K gives
∂C
∂T = 1
2 σ 2 K2 ∂2C
∂K2 −λ K ∂C
∂K
Substituting into equation (6.2) gives
σ 2
loc(K, T, S) = σ 2 −λ
K ∂C
∂K
1
2 K2 ∂2C
∂K2
= σ 2 + 2 λ σ
√
T N(d2)
N′(d2)
with
d2 = log S/K + λ T
σ
√
T
−σ
√
T
2

Modeling Default Risk
81
For very low strikes K/S ≪1, we have d2 ≫0 and
N(d2) ≈1
N′(d2) =
1
√
2π
e−d2
2/2
Then, for very low strikes,
σ 2
loc(K, T, S) ≈σ 2 + 2 λ σ
√
T
√
2π e+d2
2/2
Figure 6.3 shows a typical jump-to-ruin local variance surface. From
Chapter 3, we know that implied variance (volatility squared) is a gamma-
weighted average of local variances. It follows that implied volatility in
the jump-to-ruin model increases very fast as the strike decreases from
at-the-money and tends to the constant σ for high strikes—exactly con-
sistent with Figure 6.1 and quite different from the stochastic volatility
case.
0.4
0
0.4
Logstrike
0
0.5
1.
Expiration
0.
0.3
0.6
FIGURE 6.3
Local variance plot with λ = 0.05 and σ = 0.2.

82
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
THE EFFECT OF DEFAULT RISK ON OPTION PRICES
To make the foregoing a little more concrete, consider the implied volatilities
of January-05 options on GT (Goodyear Tire and Rubber) as of October
20, 2004.
We noted earlier that the price of a European call option in the
Merton jump-to-ruin model is given by the Black-Scholes formula with
a shifted interest rate. Our experiment is to ﬁnd the shifted rate and
constant volatility that generate prices closest to the European option
prices∗computed using these implied volatilities (i.e., the best ﬁt parameters
of the Merton model).
We ﬁnd the best ﬁt parameters:
λ = 0.01934
σ = 0.3946
With these parameters, we may compute call option prices and compute the
standard (risk-free) Black-Scholes implied volatilities. The results are shown
in Table 6.2.
In fact, because GT credit spreads are very high, the Merton model ﬁts
the left wing of the volatility skew very well as shown in Figure 6.4.
TABLE 6.2
Implied volatilities for January 2005 options on GT as of October 20,
2004 (GT was trading at 9.40). Merton vols are volatilities generated from the
Merton model with ﬁtted parameters.
Strike
Bid Vol.
Ask Vol.
Merton Vol.
2.50
147.2%
145.2%
5.00
73.6%
88.3%
85.8%
7.50
48.3%
58.2%
51.2%
10.00
38.1%
45.0%
43.1%
12.50
41.2%
48.1%
41.5%
15.00
51.2%
54.3%
40.9%
17.50
64.5%
66.5%
40.6%
20.00
77.3%
40.0%
25.00
94.7%
40.0%
30.00
108.3%
40.0%
∗Note that traded options are American. We are making the reasonable assumption
here that American implied volatilities are close to European implied volatilities.

Modeling Default Risk
83
1
0.5
0.5
1
Log strike
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Implied Vol
FIGURE 6.4
The triangles represent bid and offer volatilities and the solid line is
the Merton model ﬁt.
However, the Merton model produces a skew that is a little too steep for
low strikes and as predicted generates no right wing (high strike structure)
at all and that’s just not consistent with the data. As we are by now well
aware from our study of stochastic volatility, the positively sloped right
wing in the empirically observed volatility surface reﬂects uncertainty in the
future level of volatility; the ﬂat right wing in the Merton model reﬂects its
deterministic volatility assumption.
Finally, we might ask whether or not the ﬁtted parameters are realistic.
The volatility estimate σ = 39.46% is clearly realistic from inspection of
the implied volatilities. To see that the hazard rate estimate of λ = 0.01934
is also realistic, we note that the fair price of a zero coupon bond of GT
(assuming zero rates) should be given by
Pt = e−λ t R + (1 −e−λ t)
where R is the recovery rate. With Bloomberg’s standard assumed recovery
rate of 0.4, the credit spread of this bond would be found by solving
Pt = e−ct = e−λ t R + (1 −e−λ t)
With the above choices of λ and R, we obtain
c = 4.58%

84
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
This compares with the 5-year credit default swap (CDS) rate of over 5%
for GT; the derived credit spread is almost certainly too high for 3-month
paper. However, the main point remains: most of the volatility skew for
stocks with high credit spreads can be ascribed to default risk.
THE CREDITGRADES MODEL
If Merton’s jump-to-ruin model is the prototypical reduced form model,
then the prototypical structural model is the one due to Black and Scholes
(1973) and Merton (1974) that models equity as a call option on the value
of a company. The value of the company V is assumed to diffuse with no
jumps. Debt is then equivalent to a call writer’s position of long V and short
the call on V. There is then a very natural connection between the stock
price and stock volatility; as the stock price declines, the company gets more
leveraged and stock volatility increases, exactly as observed empirically.
Obviously, this generates an implied volatility skew too.
The one big practical problem with this simple model is that there is no
way to generate signiﬁcant short-dated credit spreads; default occurs when
the value of the company hits a certain level below the current value and
for short times, there is insufﬁcient time for the V process to diffuse to the
barrier. Finkelstein (2002) and Lardy (2002) resolve this by making the level
of the default barrier uncertain. This extra feature is even intuitive: Who
would claim to know exactly what level V would have to reach for default
to occur? For example American Airlines (AMR) currently has negative
book value but has an enterprise value of over $13 billion.
Model Setup
V is assumed to evolve as a driftless geometric Brownian motion, so
dVt
Vt
= σ dW
where σ is the volatility of ﬁrm value V.
The level of V at which the company defaults is given by L D where D is
today’s value of its debt (per share) and L is the recovery rate. As discussed
above, it is further assumed that the recovery rate L is a lognormally
distributed random variable with mean L and standard deviation λ so that
L D = L D eλ Z−λ2/2
where Z ∼N(0, 1). The random variable Z is assumed to be independent
of Wt.

Modeling Default Risk
85
Survival Probability
Deﬁne
Xt := σ Wt −λ Z −σ 2 t
2
−λ2
2
Then Xt is normally distributed with
E [Xt] = −σ 2
2

t + λ2
σ 2

Var [Xt] = σ 2

t + λ2
σ 2

This leads us to approximate X with a Brownian motion ˆX with drift −σ 2/2
and variance σ 2 that starts at 0 at the time −t := −λ2/σ 2 with ˆX−t = 0.
Obviously X isn’t really a Brownian motion with drift but its moments
agree with those of ˆX for t ≥0.
Default occurs when
V = V0 eσ Wt−σ 2 t/2 = L D = L D eλ Z−λ2/2
or equivalently when
Xt = log

L D
V0
	
−λ2
Since ˆX is a Brownian motion with drift, the probability of survival (or the
probability of not hitting the default barrier) is given by the Black-Scholes-
like formula
Pt = N

−At
2 + log d
At

−d N

−At
2 −log d
At

with
d = V0 eλ2
L D
; A2
t = σ 2 t + λ2
Since Pt is the probability of survival up to time t, it may be estimated
directly from the prices of risky instruments such as bonds and credit
default swaps (CDS).

86
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
As an aside, we could avoid approximating X with ˆX by computing
the survival probability conditional on a given default barrier level L
and integrating over the distribution of barrier levels. This gives rise to an
expression for the survival probability that contains the cumulative bivariate
density but is numerically little different in practice.
Equity Volatility
The stock price S is approximately related (neglecting the time value of the
option) to the ﬁrm value V via
V ≈L D + S
Then
σ ∼δV
V ≈
δS
S + L D = δS
S
S
S + L D ∼σS
S
S + L D
where σS is the stock volatility. We see that as the stock price rises, keeping
σ ﬁxed, the volatility σS of the stock declines. Conversely, as the stock price
S approaches zero, the stock volatility increases as 1/S.
Model Calibration
We end up with the following model in terms of market observables
Pt = N

−At
2 + log d
At

−d N

−At
2 −log d
At

(6.3)
with
d = S0 + L D
L D
eλ2; A2
t =

σ ∗
S
S∗
S∗+ L D
2
t + λ2
where S∗is some reference stock price and σ ∗
S the stock volatility at
that price.
In the technical document Finger (2002), L and λ are derived from
historical recovery data and D is from balance sheet data. With sufﬁciently
many bonds, we could also impute all of the parameters from the term
structure of credit spreads (or equivalently, the term structure of the survival
probability Pt). Getting L, λ and D from company and industry data rather
than from the term structure of credit spreads would theoretically enable us
to identify rich and cheap claims.
From our perspective however, we content ourselves with the realization
that once again, credit spreads are explicitly related to the volatility skew,
only this time in the context of a more realistic model.
