CHAPTER8
Dynamics of the Volatility Surface
I
n Chapter 7, we saw that all stochastic volatility models have essentially
the same implications for the shape of the volatility surface. At ﬁrst it might
seem that it would be hard to differentiate between models. That would
certainly be the case if we were to conﬁne our attention to the shape of the
volatility surface today. However, if instead we were to study the dynamics
of the volatility skew—in particular, how the observed volatility skew
depends on the overall level of volatility, we would be able to differentiate
between models.
DYNAMICS OF THE VOLATILITY SKEW
UNDER STOCHASTIC VOLATILITY
Empirical studies of the dynamics of the volatility skew show that
∂
∂kσ(k, t)
is approximately independent of volatility level over time. Translating this
into a statement about the implied variance skew, we get
∂
∂k σBS(k, t)2 = 2 σBS(k, t) ∂
∂k σBS(k, t) ∼

v(k, t).
Comparing this with equation (7.11), we see that this in turn implies that
β(v) ∼√v. Referring back to the deﬁnition of β(v) (7.1), we conclude that v
is approximately lognormal in contrast to the square root process assumed
by Heston. This makes intuitive sense given that we would expect volatility
to be more volatile if the volatility level is high than if the volatility level
itself is low.
Does it matter whether we model variance as a square root process or
as lognormal? In certain cases it does. After all, we are using our model
to hedge and the hedge should approximately generate the correct payoff
at the boundary. If the payoff that we are hedging depends (directly or
indirectly) on the volatility skew, and our assumption is that the variance
101

102
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
skew is independent of the volatility level, we could end up losing a lot of
money if that’s not how the market actually behaves.
Is any stochastic volatility model better than none at all? The answer
here has to be yes because, whereas having the wrong stochastic volatility
model will cause the hedger to generate a payoff corresponding to a skew
that may be off by a factor of 1.5 if volatility doubles, having only a local
volatility model will cause the hedger to generate a payoff that corresponds
to almost no forward skew at all. We now show this.
DYNAMICS OF THE VOLATILITY SKEW
UNDER LOCAL VOLATILITY
Empirically, the slope of the volatility skew decreases with time to expi-
ration. From the above, in the case of mean-reverting stochastic volatility,
the term structure of the BS implied variance skew will look something like
equation (7.11). In particular, the slope of the volatility skew decays over
time according to the time behavior of the coefﬁcient
1
λ′T


1 −

1 −e−λ′T
λ′T



Recall from Chapter 1 the formula (1.10) for local volatility in terms of
implied volatility:
vloc =
∂w
∂T
1 −k
w
∂w
∂k + 1
4

−1
4 −1
w + k2
w
2  ∂w
∂k
2 + 1
2
∂2w
∂k2
Differentiating with respect to x and considering only the leading term in
∂w
∂k (which is small for large T), we ﬁnd
∂vloc
∂k
≈∂
∂T
∂w
∂k + 1
w
∂w
∂T
∂w
∂k
That is, the local variance skew
∂vloc
∂k
decays with the BS implied total
variance skew ∂w
∂k .
To get the forward volatility surface from the local volatility surface
in a local volatility model, we integrate over the local volatilities from
the (forward) valuation date to the expiration of the option along the
most probable path joining the current stock price to the strike price using
the trick presented in Chapter 3. It is obvious that the forward implied

Dynamics of the Volatility Surface
103
volatility surface is substantially ﬂatter than today’s because the forward
local volatility skews are all ﬂatter.
Contrast this with a stochastic volatility model where implied volatility
skews are approximately time-homogeneous. In other words, local volatility
models imply that future BS implied volatility surfaces will be ﬂat (relative
to today’s) and stochastic volatility models imply that future BS implied
volatility surfaces will look like today’s.
STOCHASTIC IMPLIED VOLATILITY MODELS
Many authors including Brace, Goldys, Klebaner, and Womersley (2001),
Cont and da Fonseca (2002), Ledoit, Santa-Clara, and Yan (2002) and
Sch¨onbucher (1999) have looked at models that allow the entire implied
volatility surface to diffuse. It turns out that if the underlying price process
is assumed continuous (with no jumps), the statics and dynamics of the
implied volatility surface are highly constrained.
In particular, nondiscounted option prices are risk-neutral expectations
of future cashﬂows and as such must be martingales. Changes in the call
price reﬂect changes in the underlying and changes in implied volatility.
Imposing the martingale constraint
E[dCt] = 0
gives a tight relationship between the various sensitivities and many results
such as equation (7.3) follow immediately from this.
More recently, Durrleman (2005) showed how to extract the dynamics
of instantaneous variance from the dynamics of the observed implied
volatility surface in the limit of very short expirations and very close to
at-the-money. Conversely, given a stochastic volatility model, he showed
how to deduce the shape of the implied volatility surface in that same
neighborhood. However, to get these impressive results, one has to assume
continuity of the underlying price process but as we have seen earlier, jumps
in the underlying are needed to explain the shape of the implied volatility
surface. Moreover, as noted by Cont, da Fonseca, and Durrleman (2002)
and as observed by any option trader, there appear to be jumps in the
implied volatility surface too.
DIGITAL OPTIONS AND DIGITAL CLIQUETS
Applying our insights to the valuation of actual derivative contracts, we
choose to study digital options because their valuation involves the volatility
skew directly.

104
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
Valuing Digital Options
A digital (call) option D(K, T) pays 1 if the stock price ST at expiration T is
greater than the strike price K and zero otherwise. It may be valued as the
limit of a call spread as the spread between the strikes is reduced to zero.
D(K, T) = −∂C(K, T)
∂K
(8.1)
where C(K, T) represents the price of a European call option with strike K
expiring at time T.
To see that its price is very sensitive to the volatility skew, we rewrite the
European call price in equation (8.1) in terms of its Black-Scholes implied
volatility σBS(K, T).
D(K, T) = −∂
∂KCBS (K, T, σBS(K, T))
= −∂CBS
∂K −∂CBS
∂σBS
∂σBS
∂K
To get an idea of the impact of the skew in practice, consider our usual
idealized market with zero interest rate and dividends and a one-year digital
option struck at-the-money. Suppose further that at-the-money volatility is
25% and the volatility skew (typical of SPX for example) is 3% per 10%
change in strike. Its value is given by
D(1, 1) = −∂CBS
∂K −∂CBS
∂σBS
∂σBS
∂K
= N

−σ
2

−vega × skew
= N

−σ
2

+
1
√
2π
e−
d2
1
2 × 0.3
≈N

−σ
2

+ 0.4 × 0.3
If we had ignored the skew contribution, we would have got the price of the
digital option wrong by 12% of notional!
Digital Cliquets
Here is part of a deﬁnition of the word cliquet from the Dictionary of
Financial Risk Management (Gastineau and Kritzman 1999):

Dynamics of the Volatility Surface
105
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
SPX Index
FIGURE 8.1
Illustration of a cliquet payoff. This hypothetical SPX cliquet resets
at-the-money every year on October 31. The thick solid lines represent nonzero
cliquet payoffs. The payoff of a 5-year European option struck at the October 31,
2000, SPX level of 1429.40 would have been zero.
The French like the sound of ‘‘cliquet’’ and seem prepared to
apply the term to any remotely appropriate option structure.
(1) Originally a periodic reset option with multiple payouts or
a ratchet option (from vilbrequin `a cliquet—ratchet brace). Also
called Ratchet Option . . .
Since the word is originally French, here is an elegant deﬁnition
of the ‘‘Effet-cliquet’’ from the French Web site http://lexique-ﬁnancier.
actuﬁnance.fr:
M´ecanisme qui permet de ﬁger une performance mˆeme si l’actif
correspondant baisse par la suite.∗
The payoff of a hypothetical cliquet contract is shown in Figure 8.1.
For our purposes, a cliquet is just a series of options whose strikes are set
on a sequence of future dates. In particular, a digital cliquet is a sequence of
∗Mechanism that permits a proﬁt to be locked in even if the underlying subsequently
declines.

106
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
digital options whose strikes will be set (usually) at the prevailing stock price
on the relevant reset date. Denoting the set of reset dates by {t1, t2, . . . , tn},
the digital cliquet pays Coupon × θ

Sti −Sti−1

at ti where θ(.) represents
the Heaviside function.
One can see immediately that the package consisting of a zero coupon
bond together with a digital cliquet makes a very natural product for a
risk-averse retail investor—he or she typically gets an above-market coupon
if the underlying stock index is up for the period (usually a year) and a
below-market coupon (usually zero) if the underlying stock index is down.
Not surprisingly, this product was and is very popular and as a result, many
equity derivatives dealers have digital cliquets on their books.
From the foregoing, the price of a digital cliquet may vary very sub-
stantially depending on the modeling assumptions made by the seller. Those
sellers using local volatility models will certainly value a digital cliquet at
a lower price than sellers using a stochastic volatility (or more practically,
those guessing that the forward skew should look like today’s). Perversely
then, those sellers using an inadequate model will almost certainly win
the deal and end up short a portfolio of misvalued forward-starting digi-
tal options. Or even worse, a dealer could have an appropriate valuation
approach but be pushed internally by the salespeople to match (mistaken)
competitors’ lower prices.
How wrong could the price of the digital cliquet be? Consider the
example of a (not unrealistic) ﬁve-year deal that has a 6% coupon annually
if the underlying exceeds the prior annual setting and zero otherwise.
Neglecting the ﬁrst coupon (because we suppose that all dealers can price a
digital which sets today), the error could be up to 12% of the sum of the
remaining coupons (48%) or 5.76% of Notional. A pricing error of this
magnitude is a big multiple of the typical margin on such a trade and would
cause the dealer a substantial loss.
