CHAPTER9
Barrier Options
B
arrier options are important building blocks for structured products, but
their valuation can be highly model dependent. Consequently much has
been written on the subject, notably by Taleb (1996), Wilmott (2000) and
Carr and Chou (1997).
Despite all the existing literature, convincing barrier option solutions are
thin on the ground. In fact, prices quoted for certain kinds of barrier option
can vary so much between dealers that customers can sometimes cross the
bid-offer (that is, buy on one dealer’s offer and sell on another dealer’s bid
for a proﬁt). So there is still plenty of scope for the ambitious modeler.
By considering two limiting cases, we see that barrier option values
are not always very model dependent. However, the valuation of certain
types of barrier options can be extremely model dependent. Developing
intuition is therefore particularly important not only to be able to estimate
the value of a barrier options but also to know whether the output of a
model should be trusted or not. Accordingly, we will use the insights gained
from earlier chapters to understand the relative pricing of various types of
barrier options under stochastic and local volatility dynamics.
As usual, we suppose that European options of all strikes and expirations
are traded in the market and our objective is to price barrier options
consistently with these European option prices.
DEFINITIONS
A knock-out option is an option that becomes worthless when a prespeciﬁed
‘‘barrier’’ level is reached.
A live-out option is a special case of a knock-out option that is
signiﬁcantly in-the-money when it knocks out.
A knock-in option is an option that can only be exercised if a barrier
level is reached prior to exercise. Obviously, a knock-in option is just a
portfolio of short a knock-out option and long a European.
107

108
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
An amount of money paid to a barrier option buyer if the barrier is hit
is termed a rebate. This rebate may be paid when the barrier is hit or at
expiration.
LIMITING CASES
Limit Orders
Suppose we sell a knock-out call option with barrier B equal to the strike
price K below the current stock price S. Suppose further that we hedge
this position by buying one stock per option and we charge S0 −K as the
premium. If interest rates and dividends are zero, it is clear that this hedge is
perfect. To see this, suppose ﬁrst that the barrier is never hit: The buyer of
the knock-out call option exercises the option and we deliver the stock. Net
proceeds are −(ST −K) + (S0 −K) + (ST −S0) = 0. On the other hand, if
the barrier is hit, we lose S0 −K on our purchase of stock which is perfectly
offset by the premium we charged.
In this special case, a knock-out option has no optionality whatsoever.
Delta is one, gamma is zero, and vega is zero. The result is completely model
independent; the only requirement is to have no carry on the stock for this
construction to work.
Now consider what this portfolio really is. So long as the stock price
remains above the barrier level, we are net ﬂat. When the barrier is hit, the
option knocks out and we are left long of the stock we bought to hedge.
This is exactly the portfolio we would have if the option buyer had left
us a stop-loss order to sell stock if the price ever reached the barrier level
B. There is however a big difference between the two contracts—a barrier
option like this guarantees execution at the barrier level but a conventional
stop-loss order would get ﬁlled at the earliest opportunity after the barrier
is hit (usually a bit below the barrier). If we could really trade continuously
as models conventionally assume, there would be no difference between the
two contracts. In the real world, a knock-out option needs to be priced
more highly than the model price to compensate for the risk of the stock
price gapping through the barrier level. Practitioners compensate for gap
risk when pricing options by moving the barrier by some amount related to
the expected gap in the stock price when the barrier is hit.
In summary, in this special case when K = B < S0, the price of a knock-
out call is given by the difference S0 −K between the current stock price
and the strike price plus a bit to compensate for gap risk.
Now, if the strike price K and the barrier level B are not equal but not
so far apart with B ≤K ≤S0, it is natural to expect that neither gamma
nor vega would be very high relative to the European option with the same

Barrier Options
109
strike K. Nor would we expect the price of such a knock-out option to be
very sensitive to the model used to value it (assuming of course that this
model prices consistently with all European options). Investigation shows
that this is indeed the case.
European Capped Calls
The next limiting case we consider is that of the European capped call.
This option is a call struck at K with barrier B > S0 such that if the stock
price reaches B before expiration, the option expires and pays out intrinsic
of B −K.
If the barrier is far away from the current stock price S0, the price of
such an option cannot be very different from the price of a conventional
European option. To see this, consider a portfolio consisting of a long
European option struck at K (not too different from S0) and short the
capped call. If the barrier is not hit, this portfolio pays nothing. If the
barrier is hit, the portfolio will be long a European option and short cash
in the amount of the intrinsic value B −K. The time value of this European
option cannot be very high because, by assumption, B ≫S0 and moreover,
the barrier is most likely to be hit close to expiration. Since the value of the
capped call must be close to the value of a conventional European call, the
value of the capped call cannot be very model dependent and should be well
approximated by a model using Black-Scholes assumptions (no volatility
skew) and the implied volatility of the corresponding European option.
With this understanding of the pricing of capped calls, we are in a
position to develop intuition for the pricing of live-out calls. To get a
live-out call from a capped call, we need only omit the rebate at the barrier.
We would then have a call option struck at K that goes deep-in-the-money
as the stock price approaches the barrier B ≫K and knocks out when the
stock price reaches B (with no rebate). So to get intuition for the pricing and
hedging of live-out options, we need only study the pricing and hedging of
the rebate (or one-touch option).
THE REFLECTION PRINCIPLE
We suppose that the stock price is driven by a constant volatility stochastic
process with zero log-drift. That is
dx = σdZ
(9.1)
with x := log (S/K).

110
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
In this special case, there is a very simple relationship between the price
of a European binary option struck at B and the value of the one-touch
option struck at B.
Consider the realization of the zero log-drift stochastic process (9.1)
given by the solid line in Figure 9.1. From the symmetry of the problem, the
dashed path has the same probability of being realized as the original solid
path. We deduce that the probability of hitting the barrier B is exactly twice
the probability of ending up below the barrier at expiration. Putting this
another way, the value of a one-touch option is precisely twice the value of
a European binary put.
To make this result appear plausible note that an at-the-money barrier
has 100% chance of getting hit but there is only 50% chance of ending
up below the barrier at expiration in this special case. Guessing at a
generalization, we might suppose that the ratio of the fair value of a one-
touch option should be given by B(S0)−1 where B(K) represents the value of
a European binary put struck at K.
If this guess were correct, for the Heston-Nandi model and parameters
of Chapter 4 (v = 0.04, v = 0.04, λ = 10, η = 1, ρ = −1), where B(S0) =
0.54614, the ratio of the one-touch price to the European binary price
should be around B(S0)−1 = 1.831. Figure 9.2 shows how this ratio is, as
Taleb (1996) emphasizes, very sensitive to modeling assumptions. Although
our guess is pretty accurate for the local volatility case, it is very inaccurate
in the stochastic volatility case.
For comparison, consider the effect of modeling assumptions on the
price of a European binary call. Figure 9.3 shows that modeling assumptions
FIGURE 9.1
A realization of the zero log-drift stochastic process and the
reﬂected path.

Barrier Options
111
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
Barrier
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
Ratio
FIGURE 9.2
The ratio of the value of a one-touch call to the value of a European
binary call under stochastic volatility and local volatility assumptions as a function
of strike. The solid line is stochastic volatility and the dashed line is local volatility.
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Barrier
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Value
FIGURE 9.3
The value of a European binary call under stochastic volatility and
local volatility assumptions as a function of strike. The solid line is stochastic
volatility and the dashed line is local volatility. The two lines are almost
indistinguishable.
have no effect—the price of a European binary is independent of modeling
assumptions and depends only on the given prices of conventional European
options (being a limit of a call spread in this case).
Finally, we graph the value of the one-touch option as a function of strike
under stochastic volatility and local volatility assumptions in Figure 9.4.

112
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Barrier
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Value
FIGURE 9.4
The value of a one-touch call under stochastic volatility and local
volatility assumptions as a function of barrier level. The solid line is stochastic
volatility and the dashed line is local volatility.
THE LOOKBACK HEDGING ARGUMENT
A closely related useful hedging argument originally given by Goldman,
Sosin, and Gatto (1979) is used to estimate the price and hedge portfolio
of a lookback option. For our purposes, we deﬁne a lookback call to be an
option that pays (˜S −K)+ at expiration where ˜S is the maximum stock price
over the life of the option and K is the strike price.
Once again, assuming zero log-drift and constant volatility, suppose we
hedge a short position in this lookback call by holding two conventional
European options struck at K. If the stock price never reaches K, both the
lookback and the European option expire worthless. If and when the stock
price does reach K and increases by some small increment K, the value of
the lookback option must increase by K (since K + K is now the new
maximum). The new lookback option must pay K + (˜S −(K + K))+−
the payoff of another lookback option with a higher strike price plus a ﬁxed
cashﬂow K.
Assuming we were right to hedge with two calls in the ﬁrst place,
the new hedge portfolio must be two calls struck at K + K. So we must
rebalance our hedge portfolio by selling two calls struck at K and buying
two calls struck at K + K. The proﬁt generated by rebalancing is
2 C(K + K, K) −2 C(K + K, K + K) ≈−2 ∂C
∂K

S=K
K

Barrier Options
113
= 2 N

d2

S=K
= K
using the fact that N

d2

S=K = 1/2 when the log-drift is zero.
The proﬁt generated by rebalancing is exactly what is needed to generate
the required payoff of the lookback option and our hedge is perfect.
One-Touch Options Again
Now reconsider the value of a one-touch call option struck at B. It is the
probability that the maximum stock price is greater than B. We can generate
this payoff by taking the limit of a lookback call spread as the difference
between the strikes gets very small. Because a lookback call has the same
value as two European calls, a lookback call spread must have the same
value as two European call spreads. Put another way, a one-touch option is
worth two European binary options when the log-drift is zero.
PUT-CALL SYMMETRY
We now assume zero interest rates and dividends and constant volatility
again (as opposed to zero log-drift). In this case, by inspection of the
Black-Scholes formula, we have
C
B2
S , K

= K
S P

S, B2
K

From one of the many references containing closed-form formulas for
knock-out options, we may deduce that
DO (S, K, B) = C (S, K) −S
B C
B2
S , K

= C (S, K) −K
B P

S, B2
K

where DO(.) represents the value of a down-and-out call.
By letting S = B in the above formula, we see that DO (B, K, B) = 0
as we would expect. So, in this special case, there is a static hedge for a
down-and-out call option that consists of long a European call with the same
strike and short K
B European puts struck at the reﬂection of the log-strike in
the log-barrier (K′ = B2/K).

114
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
The reason this static hedge works is that the value of the call we are
long always exactly offsets the value of the put we are short when the stock
price reaches the barrier B.
A special case of this special case is when B = K. In this case, we have
DO (S, K, K) = C (S, K) −P (S, K) = S −K
and we see again that there is no optionality—the down-and-out call option
is worth only intrinsic value and has the same payoff as a portfolio of long
the stock and short K bonds as we argued before.
QUASISTATIC HEDGING AND QUALITATIVE VALUATION
We can generalize the static hedging procedure of the previous section to
other cases where interest rates, dividends and volatility have arbitrary
structure. Although there is no exact static hedge in the general case, we
can construct a portfolio that has rather small payoffs under all reasonable
scenarios.
A sophisticated version of this procedure known as the Lagrangian
Uncertain Volatility Model is described by Avellaneda, Levy, and Par´as
(1995). In this model, volatility is bounded but uncertain; volatility is
assumed to be high when the portfolio is short gamma and low when the
portfolio is long gamma (worst case). Thus, different prices are generated
depending on whether an option position is long or short (a bid-offer spread
is generated). By minimizing the bid-offer spread of a given portfolio of
exotic options (such as barrier options) and European options with respect
to the weights of the European options, we can determine an optimal
hedge and the minimal bid-offer spread that would be required to guarantee
proﬁtability assuming that volatility does indeed remain within the assumed
bounds.
More practically, we can use the quasi-static hedging idea to determine
the impact of modeling assumptions on the valuation of any given barrier-
like claim. The idea is to ﬁrst determine what the quasistatic hedge looks
like, then ﬁgure out how this hedge behaves under various future stock price
and volatility scenarios—a sort of mental Monte Carlo simulation. We now
illustrate this approach with a few examples.
Out-of-the-Money Barrier Options
For concreteness, suppose we sell a call with strike K that knocks out at
B < K. In this case, the quasistatic hedge portfolio is long a European call

Barrier Options
115
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Barrier
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
Value
FIGURE 9.5
Values of knock-out call options struck at 1 as a function of barrier
level. The solid line is stochastic volatility; the dashed line is local volatility.
with strike K and short an out-of-the money European put (with strike B2/K
in the zero log-drift case).
If the barrier is never hit, the hedge is obviously good. On the other hand,
if the barrier is hit, the value of the then out-of-the-money European call
and out-of-the-money European put in the hedge portfolio depend on the
then volatility skew. From our discussion of volatility surface dynamics in
Chapter 8, we know that with the Heston-Nandi parameters of Chapter 4,
the skew will be ﬂatter (less negative) under local volatility than under
stochastic volatility. We conclude that when the barrier is hit, the hedge
portfolio will be worth more under local volatility than under stochastic
volatility. However, both options will be out-of-the-money so we don’t
expect the skew effect to be very big. We therefore guess that the pricing
of a call that knocks out out-of-the-money would be a little lower under
local volatility (because the net expected hedging cost is lower) than under
stochastic volatility. This guess is supported by the graphs in Figures 9.5
and 9.6.
One-Touch Options
Recall that a one-touch call option pays some prespeciﬁed amount of money
if an upside barrier is hit. Suppose we sell such a one-touch call option
struck at B > S. The quasi-static hedge portfolio should be (approximately)
long a strip of European binary call options struck at B. Once again, if
the barrier is never hit, the hedge is obviously ﬁne. With the Heston-Nandi

116
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Barrier
0.11
0.12
0.13
Value
FIGURE 9.6
Values of knock-out call options struck at 0.9 as a function of barrier
level. The solid line is stochastic volatility; the dashed line is local volatility.
parameters of Chapter 4,∗the skew when the barrier is hit will be ﬂatter (less
negative) under local volatility than under stochastic volatility. It follows
that the binary call options will be worth more under stochastic volatility.
That is, on average the one-touch option costs less to hedge under stochastic
volatility than under local volatility and so its upfront valuation should
be lower under stochastic volatility. This qualitative argument explains the
graph shown in Figure 9.4.
Live-Out Options
As before, we model a live-out call as a capped call minus a one-touch.
Once again, we guess that the value of the capped call should be pretty
much identical under stochastic and local volatility modeling assumptions.
On the other hand, from our previous discussion, with the Heston-Nandi
parameters of Chapter 4, we expect the value of the one-touch option to be
lower under stochastic volatility than under local volatility.
We conclude that with these parameters, a live-out call should be worth
more under stochastic volatility than under local volatility. This guess is
supported by the graph in Figure 9.7. Note that the difference in valuation
between the two modeling assumptions can be very substantial.
∗The implication here and in what follows is that where some result is shown to
hold for this special choice of parameters that make computations easy, there is
every reason to suppose that the same result holds more generally for any choice of
stochastic volatility dynamics and parameters.

Barrier Options
117
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Barrier
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
Value
FIGURE 9.7
Values of live-out call options struck at 1 as a function of barrier level.
The solid line is stochastic volatility; the dashed line is local volatility.
Lookback Options
Suppose now that we sell a lookback call option struck at K > S. The hedge
is roughly two European call options struck at K. If the stock price never
reaches K, the hedge is ﬁne. If and when the stock price reaches K, we need
to sell our two European calls with strike K and buy two new calls with
strike K + K. Equivalently, we need to sell two call spreads. Once again,
with the Heston-Nandi parameters of Chapter 4, the skew will be more
negative under stochastic volatility than under local volatility. We therefore
earn more for our call spreads under stochastic volatility than under local
volatility. We conclude that with these parameters, a lookback call option
should be valued lower under stochastic volatility than under local volatility
assumptions. This guess is supported by the graph in Figure 9.8. On closer
examination, we see that the ratio of the stochastic volatility value to the
local volatility value decreases with increasing strike. That’s because on
average the higher the strike, the greater the time elapsed between inception
and the ﬁrst rebalancing operation.
ADJUSTING FOR DISCRETE MONITORING
A practical point that is worth noting is that the discreteness effect for
barrier options is very signiﬁcant. Often barrier option contracts specify
that the barrier is only to be monitored at the market close. How can we
estimate the magnitude of the effect of this on the value of a barrier option?

118
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Strike
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Value
FIGURE 9.8
Values of lookback call options as a function of strike. The solid line is
stochastic volatility; the dashed line is local volatility.
We can get an idea of the order of magnitude of the correction using our
newly acquired intuition for lookback options. Without loss of generality,
suppose a given discrete (up-) barrier option is monitored daily and consider
the day on which the discrete maximum is ﬁrst reached. It is highly likely that
the continuous maximum was reached on the same day. At the beginning
of that day, the expected difference between the maximum reached and the
ﬁnal stock price is a lookback option that is worth approximately twice a
1-day European option or
2 σ
√
T
√
2π
≈0.8 σ
√
T
Then, denoting the fair value of discretely monitored and continuously
monitored options with up-barrier B by ˜V(B) and V(B) respectively, we have
˜V (B) ≈V

B e0.8 σ
√
T
In fact, Broadie, Glasserman, and Kou (1999) prove the following
theorem:
Let V(B) be the price of a continuous barrier option, and Vm(B) be the
price of an otherwise identical barrier option with m monitoring points.
Then we have the approximation
Vm(B) = V(B e±βσ√
T/m) + o(1/√m)

Barrier Options
119
with + for an up option and −for a down option, where the constant
β = −ζ(1/2)
√
2π
≈0.5826
and ζ is the Riemann zeta function.
The idea of the proof is to estimate the amount by which the discretely
monitored stock price overshoots the barrier level (as it must in general) the
ﬁrst time it exceeds it. The amount of overshoot is given approximately by
B e±βσ√
T/m −B.
The difference in price between a discretely monitored barrier option
and its continuously monitored equivalent is often substantial. For example,
with σ = 0.32 and daily monitoring (
√
T ≈1/16), the adjustment would
be around 0.32×0.6
16
= .012 (1.2% of the barrier level).
Discretely Monitored Lookback Options
One might guess from the previous result that the expected difference
between the continuous maximum and the discrete maximum might be
approximated by the same number. Broadie, Glasserman, and Kou (1999)
prove that this is indeed the case. In their paper they show that
E[ˆST] = E[˜ST] e−β σ
√
T
(9.2)
where ˆS is the discrete maximum, ˜S is the continuous maximum and T is
the monitoring interval.
An at-the-money lookback (or hindsight) option ˆL(S0, T) pays the
discrete maximum minus the initial stock price. We can rewrite equa-
tion (9.2) as
ˆL(S0, T) = E[ˆST −S0]
= E[˜ST] e−β σ
√
T −S0
= ˜L(S0 e−β σ
√
T, T) −S0

1 −e−β σ
√
T
where ˜L is the equivalent continuously monitored option. Similar adjust-
ments for other types of lookback option are given in the (Broadie,
Glasserman, and Kou 1999).

120
THE VOLATILITY SURFACE
PARISIAN OPTIONS
As described in Taleb (1996), continuously monitored barrier options can
tempt either the option buyer or seller to inﬂuence the underlying stock price
(‘‘barrier wars’’). Discretely monitored options suffer from similar problems.
One way to retain the beneﬁts of barrier options while minimizing the risk
of manipulation is to specify that in order for the option to knock-in (or out
as the case may be), the underlying stock price must stay outside the barrier
for a minimum period of time referred to as a window. In this case, the
option is called a Parisian option. As a further advantage, Parisian options
have much less extreme greeks than their non-Parisian counterparts.
Parisian-style features are common in convertible bonds and whenever
the size of a derivative is large relative to the liquidity of the underlying stock.
With the usual constant parameter assumptions, Parisian options can
be valued in almost-closed form by applying some results on the excursion
process of Brownian motion (see for example Chapter 12 of Revuz and
Yor (1999)). However in the general case, as in most other barrier option
valuation problems, the most natural valuation approach is numerical PDE
as described for example by Tavella and Randall (2000).
SOME APPLICATIONS OF BARRIER OPTIONS
Ladders
Consider a strip of capped calls with strikes Bi strictly increasing and greater
than the initial stock price S0. The cap of the option with strike Bi is Bi+1
so a rebate of Bi+1—Bi is paid when the barrier at Bi+1 is hit. The buyer of
such an option locks in his gain each time a barrier is crossed. This gain is
not lost if the stock price subsequently falls. Not surprisingly, this structure
is very popular with retail investors. In the limit where the caps are very
close to the strikes, a ladder approximates a lookback option (every time
the stock price increases, the gain is locked in) and the value of the ladder
would be approximately twice the value of a European option. Typically
though, barriers would be every 10% or so and the value of the ladder
would be around 1.5 times the value of the corresponding European option.
Ranges
Another popular investment is one that pays a high coupon for each day
that the stock price remains within a range but ceases paying a coupon as
soon as one of the boundaries is hit. This is a just a one-touch double barrier
construction.

Barrier Options
121
CONCLUSION
Barrier option values can be very sensitive to modeling assumptions and
prices must be adjusted to take this into account. Nevertheless, by under-
standing limiting cases that are well understood, we can gain a good
qualitative understanding of the appropriate valuation and hedge portfolio
for any given barrier option. Market practitioners are often reluctant to
quote on any barrier option given the potential valuation uncertainty and
the hedging complexity. What we have shown is that this reluctance is not
always justiﬁed—sometimes a barrier option is much less risky and easier
to price than its European equivalent.
