1
Introduction
In this article, we conduct a comparative analysis of machine learning methods for ﬁnance. We do
so in the context of perhaps the most widely studied problem in ﬁnance, that of measuring equity
risk premia.
1.1
Primary Contributions
Our primary contributions are two-fold. First, we provide a new set of benchmarks for the predictive
accuracy of machine learning methods in measuring risk premia of the aggregate market and indi-
vidual stocks. This accuracy is summarized two ways. The ﬁrst is a high out-of-sample predictive
R2 relative to preceding literature that is robust across a variety of machine learning speciﬁcations.
Second, and more importantly, we demonstrate the large economic gains to investors using machine
learning forecasts. A portfolio strategy that times the S&P 500 with neural network forecasts enjoys
an annualized out-of-sample Sharpe ratio of 0.77, versus the 0.51 Sharpe ratio of a buy-and-hold
investor. And a value-weighted long-short decile spread strategy that takes positions based on stock-
level neural network forecasts earns an annualized out-of-sample Sharpe ratio of 1.35, more than
doubling the performance of a leading regression-based strategy from the literature.
Return prediction is economically meaningful. The fundamental goal of asset pricing is to un-
derstand the behavior of risk premia.1 If expected returns were perfectly observed, we would still
need theories to explain their behavior and empirical analysis to test those theories. But risk premia
are notoriously diﬃcult to measure—market eﬃciency forces return variation to be dominated by
unforecastable news that obscures risk premia. Our research highlights gains that can be achieved
in prediction and identiﬁes the most informative predictor variables. This helps resolve the prob-
lem of risk premium measurement, which then facilitates more reliable investigation into economic
mechanisms of asset pricing.
Second, we synthesize the empirical asset pricing literature with the ﬁeld of machine learning.
Relative to traditional empirical methods in asset pricing, machine learning accommodates a far
more expansive list of potential predictor variables and richer speciﬁcations of functional form. It is
this ﬂexibility that allows us to push the frontier of risk premium measurement. Interest in machine
learning methods for ﬁnance has grown tremendously in both academia and industry. This article
provides a comparative overview of machine learning methods applied to the two canonical problems
of empirical asset pricing: predicting returns in the cross section and time series. Our view is that the
best way for researchers to understand the usefulness of machine learning in the ﬁeld of asset pricing
is to apply and compare the performance of each of its methods in familiar empirical problems.
1Our focus is on measuring conditional expected stock returns in excess of the risk-free rate. Academic ﬁnance
traditionally refers to this quantity as the “risk premium” due to its close connection with equilibrium compensation for
bearing equity investment risk. We use the terms “expected return” and “risk premium” interchangeably. One may be
interested in potentially distinguishing among diﬀerent components of expected returns such as those due to systematic
risk compensation, idiosyncratic risk compensation, or even due to mispricing. For machine learning approaches to this
problem, see Gu et al. (2019) and Kelly et al. (2019).
2
