1.2
What is Machine Learning?
The deﬁnition of “machine learning” is inchoate and is often context speciﬁc. We use the term to
describe (i) a diverse collection of high-dimensional models for statistical prediction, combined with
(ii) so-called “regularization” methods for model selection and mitigation of overﬁt, and (iii) eﬃcient
algorithms for searching among a vast number of potential model speciﬁcations.
The high-dimensional nature of machine learning methods (element (i) of this deﬁnition) enhances
their ﬂexibility relative to more traditional econometric prediction techniques. This ﬂexibility brings
hope of better approximating the unknown and likely complex data generating process underlying
equity risk premia.
With enhanced ﬂexibility, however, comes a higher propensity of overﬁtting
the data. Element (ii) of our machine learning deﬁnition describes reﬁnements in implementation
that emphasize stable out-of-sample performance to explicitly guard against overﬁt. Finally, with
many predictors it becomes infeasible to exhaustively traverse and compare all model permutations.
Element (iii) describes clever machine learning tools designed to approximate an optimal speciﬁcation
with manageable computational cost.
1.3
Why Apply Machine Learning to Asset Pricing?
A number of aspects of empirical asset pricing make it a particularly attractive ﬁeld for analysis with
machine learning methods.
1) Two main research agendas have monopolized modern empirical asset pricing research. The
ﬁrst seeks to describe and understand diﬀerences in expected returns across assets.
The second
focuses on dynamics of the aggregate market equity risk premium. Measurement of an asset’s risk
premium is fundamentally a problem of prediction—the risk premium is the conditional expectation
of a future realized excess return.
Machine learning, whose methods are largely specialized for
prediction tasks, is thus ideally suited to the problem of risk premium measurement.
2) The collection of candidate conditioning variables for the risk premium is large. The profession
has accumulated a staggering list of predictors that various researchers have argued possess forecast-
ing power for returns. The number of stock-level predictive characteristics reported in the literature
numbers in the hundreds and macroeconomic predictors of the aggregate market number in the
dozens.2 Additionally, predictors are often close cousins and highly correlated. Traditional predic-
tion methods break down when the predictor count approaches the observation count or predictors
are highly correlated. With an emphasis on variable selection and dimension reduction techniques,
machine learning is well suited for such challenging prediction problems by reducing degrees of free-
dom and condensing redundant variation among predictors.
3) Further complicating the problem is ambiguity regarding functional forms through which the
high-dimensional predictor set enter into risk premia. Should they enter linearly? If nonlinearities
2Green et al. (2013) count 330 stock-level predictive signals in published or circulated drafts. Harvey et al. (2016)
study 316 “factors,” which include ﬁrm characteristics and common factors, for describing stock return behavior. They
note that this is only a subset of those studied in the literature. Welch and Goyal (2008) analyze nearly 20 predictors
for the aggregate market return. In both stock and aggregate return predictions, there presumably exists a much larger
set of predictors that were tested but failed to predict returns and were thus never reported.
3
