are needed, which form should they take? Must we consider interactions among predictors? Such
questions rapidly proliferate the set of potential model speciﬁcations. The theoretical literature oﬀers
little guidance for winnowing the list of conditioning variables and functional forms. Three aspects
of machine learning make it well suited for problems of ambiguous functional form. The ﬁrst is its
diversity. As a suite of dissimilar methods it casts a wide net in its speciﬁcation search. Second, with
methods ranging from generalized linear models to regression trees and neural networks, machine
learning is explicitly designed to approximate complex nonlinear associations.
Third, parameter
penalization and conservative model selection criteria complement the breadth of functional forms
spanned by these methods in order to avoid overﬁt biases and false discovery.
1.4
What Speciﬁc Machine Learning Methods Do We Study?
We select a set of candidate models that are potentially well suited to address the three empirical
challenges outlined above. They constitute the canon of methods one would encounter in a graduate
level machine learning textbook.3 This includes linear regression, generalized linear models with pe-
nalization, dimension reduction via principal components regression (PCR) and partial least squares
(PLS), regression trees (including boosted trees and random forests), and neural networks. This is
not an exhaustive analysis of all methods. For example, we exclude support vector machines as these
share an equivalence with other methods that we study4 and are primarily used for classiﬁcation
problems. Nonetheless, our list is designed to be representative of predictive analytics tools from
various branches of the machine learning toolkit.
1.5
Main Empirical Findings
We conduct a large scale empirical analysis, investigating nearly 30,000 individual stocks over 60
years from 1957 to 2016. Our predictor set includes 94 characteristics for each stock, interactions
of each characteristic with eight aggregate time series variables, and 74 industry sector dummy
variables, totaling more than 900 baseline signals. Some of our methods expand this predictor set
much further by including nonlinear transformations and interactions of the baseline signals. We
establish the following empirical facts about machine learning for return prediction.
Machine learning shows great promise for empirical asset pricing. At the broadest level, our
main empirical ﬁnding is that machine learning as a whole has the potential to improve our empirical
understanding of expected asset returns. It digests our predictor data set, which is massive from
the perspective of the existing literature, into a return forecasting model that dominates traditional
approaches. The immediate implication is that machine learning aids in solving practical investments
problems such as market timing, portfolio choice, and risk management, justifying its role in the
business architecture of the ﬁntech industry.
Consider as a benchmark a panel regression of individual stock returns onto three lagged stock-
level characteristics: size, book-to-market, and momentum. This benchmark has a number of attrac-
3See, for example, Hastie et al. (2009).
4See, for example, Jaggi (2013) and Hastie et al. (2009), who discuss the equivalence of support vector machines
with the lasso. For an application of the kernel trick to the cross section of returns, see Kozak (2019).
4

tive features. It is parsimonious and simple, and comparing against this benchmark is conservative
because it is highly selected (the characteristics it includes are routinely demonstrated to be among
the most robust return predictors). Lewellen (2015) demonstrates that this model performs about
as well as larger and more complex stock prediction models studied in the literature.
In our sample, which is longer and wider (more observations in terms of both dates and stocks)
than that studied in Lewellen (2015), the out-of-sample R2 from the benchmark model is 0.16% per
month for the panel of individual stock returns. When we expand the OLS panel model to include
our set of 900+ predictors, predictability vanishes immediately—the R2 drops deeply into negative
territory. This is not surprising. With so many parameters to estimate, eﬃciency of OLS regression
deteriorates precipitously and therefore produces forecasts that are highly unstable out-of-sample.
This failure of OLS leads us to our next empirical fact.
Vast predictor sets are viable for linear prediction when either penalization or dimension reduction
is used.
Our ﬁrst evidence that the machine learning toolkit aids in return prediction emerges
from the fact that the “elastic net,” which uses parameter shrinkage and variable selection to limit
the regression’s degrees of freedom, solves the OLS ineﬃciency problem.
In the 900+ predictor
regression, elastic net pulls the out-of-sample R2 into positive territory at 0.11% per month. Principal
components regression (PCR) and partial least squares (PLS), which reduce the dimension of the
predictor set to a few linear combinations of predictors, further raise the out-of-sample R2 to 0.26%
and 0.27%, respectively.
This is in spite of the presence of many likely “ﬂuke” predictors that
contribute pure noise to the large model. In other words, the high-dimensional predictor set in a
simple linear speciﬁcation is at least competitive with the status quo low-dimensional model, as long
as over-parameterization can be controlled.
Allowing for nonlinearities substantially improves predictions. Next, we expand the model to
accommodate nonlinear predictive relationships via generalized linear models, regression trees, and
neural networks. We ﬁnd that trees and neural networks unambiguously improve return prediction
with monthly stock-level R2’s between 0.33% and 0.40%. But the generalized linear model, which
introduces nonlinearity via spline functions of each individual baseline predictor (but with no predic-
tor interactions), fails to robustly outperform the linear speciﬁcation. This suggests that allowing for
(potentially complex) interactions among the baseline predictors is a crucial aspect of nonlinearities
in the expected return function. As part of our analysis, we discuss why generalized linear models
are comparatively poorly suited for capturing predictor interactions.
Shallow learning outperforms deeper learning.
When we consider a range of neural networks
from very shallow (a single hidden layer) to deeper networks (up to ﬁve hidden layers), we ﬁnd that
neural network performance peaks at three hidden layers then declines as more layers are added.
Likewise, the boosted tree and random forest algorithms tend to select trees with few “leaves” (on
average less than six leaves) in our analysis. This is likely an artifact of the relatively small amount
of data and tiny signal-to-noise ratio for our return prediction problem, in comparison to the kinds
of non-ﬁnancial settings in which deep learning thrives thanks to astronomical datasets and strong
signals (such as computer vision).
The distance between nonlinear methods and the benchmark widens when predicting portfolio
5

returns. We build bottom-up portfolio-level return forecasts from the stock-level forecasts produced
by our models. Consider, for example, bottom-up forecasts of the S&P 500 portfolio return. By
aggregating stock-level forecasts from the benchmark three-characteristic OLS model, we ﬁnd a
monthly S&P 500 predictive R2 of −0.22%. The bottom-up S&P 500 forecast from the generalized
linear model, in contrast, delivers an R2 of 0.71%. Trees and neural networks improve upon this
further, generating monthly out-of-sample R2’s between 1.08% to 1.80% per month.
The same
pattern emerges for forecasting a variety of characteristic factor portfolios, such as those formed on
the basis of size, value, investment, proﬁtability, and momentum. In particular, a neural network with
three layers produces a positive out-of-sample predictive R2 for every factor portfolio we consider.
More pronounced predictive power at the portfolio level versus the stock level is driven by the
fact that individual stock returns behave erratically for some of the smallest and least liquid stocks
in our sample. Aggregating into portfolios averages out much of the unpredictable stock-level noise
and boosts the signal strength, which helps in detecting the predictive gains from machine learning.
The economic gains from machine learning forecasts are large. Our tests show clear statistical
rejections of the OLS benchmark and other linear models in favor of nonlinear machine learning
tools. The evidence for economic gains from machine learning forecasts—in the form of portfolio
Sharpe ratios—are likewise impressive. For example, an investor who times the S&P 500 based on
bottom-up neural network forecasts enjoys a 26 percentage point increase in annualized out-of-sample
Sharpe ratio, to 0.77, relative to the 0.51 Sharpe ratio of a buy-and-hold investor. And when we
form a long-short decile spread directly sorted on stock return predictions from a neural network, the
strategy earns an annualized out-of-sample Sharpe ratio of 1.35 (value-weighted) and 2.45 (equal-
weighted). In contrast, an analogous long-short strategy using forecasts from the benchmark OLS
model delivers Sharpe ratios of 0.61 and 0.83, respectively.
The most successful predictors are price trends, liquidity, and volatility. All of the methods we
study produce a very similar ranking of the most informative stock-level predictors, which fall into
three main categories. First, and most informative of all, are price trend variables including stock
momentum, industry momentum, and short-term reversal. Next are liquidity variables including
market value, dollar volume, and bid-ask spread. Finally, return volatility, idiosyncratic volatility,
market beta, and beta squared are also among the leading predictors in all models we consider.
Better understanding our machine learning ﬁndings through simulation. In Appendix A we per-
form Monte Carlo simulations that support the above interpretations of our analysis. We apply
machine learning to simulated data from two diﬀerent data generating processes. Both produce data
from a high dimensional predictor set. But in one, individual predictors enter only linearly and ad-
ditively, while in the other predictors can enter through nonlinear transformations and via pairwise
interactions. When we apply our machine learning repertoire to the simulated datasets, we ﬁnd that
linear and generalized linear methods dominate in the linear and uninteracted setting, yet tree-based
methods and neural networks signiﬁcantly outperform in the nonlinear and interactive setting.
6
