1.6
What Machine Learning Cannot Do
Machine learning has great potential for improving risk premium measurement, which is funda-
mentally a problem of prediction. It amounts to best approximating the conditional expectation
E(ri,t+1|Ft), where ri,t+1 is an asset’s return in excess of the risk-free rate, and Ft is the true and
unobservable information set of market participants. This is a domain in which machine learning
algorithms excel.
But these improved predictions are only measurements. The measurements do not tell us about
economic mechanisms or equilibria. Machine learning methods on their own do not identify deep
fundamental associations among asset prices and conditioning variables. When the objective is to
understand economic mechanisms, machine learning may still be useful. It requires the economist to
add structure—to build a hypothesized mechanism into the estimation problem—and decide how to
introduce a machine learning algorithm subject to this structure. A nascent literature has begun to
make progress marrying machine learning with equilibrium asset pricing (for example, Kelly et al.,
2019; Feng et al., 2019), and this remains an exciting direction for future research.
1.7
Literature
Our work extends the empirical literature on stock return prediction, which comes in two basic
strands. The ﬁrst strand models diﬀerences in expected returns across stocks as a function of stock-
level characteristics, and is exempliﬁed by Fama and French (2008) and Lewellen (2015). The typical
approach in this literature runs cross-sectional regressions5 of future stock returns on a few lagged
stock characteristics.
The second strand forecasts the time series of returns and is surveyed by
Koijen and Nieuwerburgh (2011) and Rapach and Zhou (2013). This literature typically conducts
time series regressions of broad aggregate portfolio returns on a small number of macroeconomic
predictor variables.
These traditional methods have potentially severe limitations that more advanced statistical tools
in machine learning can help overcome. Most important is that regressions and portfolio sorts are
ill-suited to handle the large numbers of predictor variables that the literature has accumulated over
ﬁve decades. The challenge is how to assess the incremental predictive content of a newly proposed
predictor while jointly controlling for the gamut of extant signals (or, relatedly, handling the multiple
comparisons and false discovery problem). Our primary contribution is to demonstrate potent return
predictability that is harnessable from the large collection of existing variables when machine learning
methods are used.
Machine learning methods have appeared sporadically in the asset pricing literature. Rapach
et al. (2013) apply lasso to predict global equity market returns using lagged returns of all countries.
Several papers apply neural-networks to forecast derivatives prices (Hutchinson et al., 1994; Yao
et al., 2000, among others). Khandani et al. (2010) and Butaru et al. (2016) use regression trees
to predict consumer credit card delinquencies and defaults. Sirignano et al. (2016) estimate a deep
5In addition to least squares regression, the literature often sorts assets into portfolios on the basis of characteristics
and studies portfolio averages—a form of nonparametric regression.
7
