turn an input to the estimation. Thus the third, or “testing,” subsample, which is used for neither
estimation nor tuning, is truly out-of-sample and thus is used to evaluate a method’s predictive
performance. Further details of our sample splitting scheme are provided in Appendix D, and a
summary of hyperparameter tuning schemes for each model is provided in Appendix E.
2.2
Simple Linear
We begin our model description with the least complex method in our analysis, the simple linear
predictive regression model estimated via ordinary least squares (OLS). While we expect this to
perform poorly in our high dimension problem, we use it as a reference point for emphasizing the
distinctive features of more sophisticated methods.
Model. The simple linear model imposes that conditional expectations g⋆(·) can be approxi-
mated by a linear function of the raw predictor variables and the parameter vector, θ,
g(zi,t; θ) = z′
i,tθ.
(3)
This model imposes a simple regression speciﬁcation and does not allow for nonlinear eﬀects or
interactions between predictors.
Objective Function and Computational Algorithm. Our baseline estimation of the simple
linear model uses a standard least squares, or “l2”, objective function:
L(θ) =
1
NT
N
X
i=1
T
X
t=1
(ri,t+1 −g(zi,t; θ))2 .
(4)
Minimizing L(θ) yields the pooled OLS estimator. The convenience of the baseline l2 objective func-
tion is that it oﬀers analytical estimates and thus avoids sophisticated optimization and computation.
2.2.1
Extension: Robust Objective Functions
In some cases it is possible to improve predictive performance by replacing equation (4) with a
weighted least squares objective such as
LW (θ) =
1
NT
N
X
i=1
T
X
t=1
wi,t (ri,t+1 −g(zi,t; θ))2 .
(5)
This allows the econometrician to tilt estimates towards observations that are more statistically or
economically informative. For example, one variation that we consider sets wi,t inversely proportional
to the number of stocks at time t. This imposes that every month has the same contribution to
the model regardless of how many stocks are available that month. This also amounts to equally
weighting the squared loss of all stocks available at time t. Another variation that we consider sets
wi,t proportional to the equity market value of stock i at time t. This value weighted loss function
underweights small stocks in favor of large stocks, and is motivated by the economic rational that
10
