small stocks represent a large fraction of the traded universe by count while constituting a tiny
fraction of aggregate market capitalization.7
Heavy tails are a well known attribute of ﬁnancial returns and stock-level predictor variables.
Convexity of the least squares objective (4) places extreme emphasis on large errors, thus outliers
can undermine the stability of OLS-based predictions. The statistics literature, long aware of this
problem, has developed modiﬁed least squares objective functions that tend to produce more stable
forecasts than OLS in the presence of extreme observations.8 In the machine learning literature,
a common choice for counteracting the deleterious eﬀect of heavy-tailed observations is the Huber
robust objective function, deﬁned as
LH(θ) =
1
NT
N
X
i=1
T
X
t=1
H (ri,t+1 −g(zi,t; θ), ξ) ,
(6)
where
H(x; ξ) =
(
x2,
if
|x| ≤ξ;
2ξ|x| −ξ2,
if
|x| > ξ.
.
The Huber loss, H(·), is a hybrid of squared loss for relatively small errors and absolute loss for
relatively large errors, where the combination is controlled by a tuning parameter, ξ, that can be
optimized adaptively from the data.9
While this detour introduces robust objective functions in the context of the simple linear model,
they are easily applicable in almost all of the methods that we study. In our empirical analysis we
study the predictive beneﬁts of robust loss functions in multiple machine learning methods.
2.3
Penalized Linear
The simple linear model is bound to fail in the presence of many predictors. When the number
of predictors P approaches the number of observations T, the linear model becomes ineﬃcient or
even inconsistent.10
It begins to overﬁt noise rather than extracting signal. This is particularly
troublesome for the problem of return prediction where the signal-to-noise ratio is notoriously low.
Crucial for avoiding overﬁt is reducing the number of estimated parameters. The most common
machine learning device for imposing parameter parsimony is to append a penalty to the objective
function in order to favor more parsimonious speciﬁcations. This “regularization” of the estimation
problem mechanically deteriorates a model’s in-sample performance in hopes that it improves its
stability out-of-sample. This will be the case when penalization manages to reduce the model’s ﬁt
7As of Fama and French (2008), the smallest 20% of stocks comprise only 3% of aggregate market capitalization.
An example of a statistically motivated weighting scheme uses wi,t inversely proportional to an observation’s estimated
error variance, a choice that potentially improves prediction eﬃciency in the spirit of generalized least squares.
8Classical analyses include Box (1953), Tukey (1960), and Huber (1964).
9OLS is a special case of the (6) with ξ = ∞. While most theoretical analysis in high-dimensional statistics assume
that data have sub-Gaussian or sub-exponential tails, Fan et al. (2017) provide a theoretical justiﬁcation of using this
loss function in the high-dimensional setting as well as a procedure to determine the hyperparameter.
10We deliberately compare P with T, instead of with NT, because stock returns share strong cross-sectional depen-
dence, limiting the incremental information contained in new cross-section observations.
11
