of noise while preserving its ﬁt of the signal.
Objective Function and Computational Algorithm. The statistical model for our penalized
linear model is the same as the simple linear model in equation (3). That is, it continues to consider
only the baseline, untransformed predictors. Penalized methods diﬀer by appending a penalty to the
original loss function:
L(θ; ·) =L(θ) + φ(θ; ·).
(7)
There are several choices for the penalty function φ(θ; ·). We focus on the popular “elastic net”
penalty, which takes the form
φ(θ; λ, ρ) = λ(1 −ρ)
P
X
j=1
|θj| + 1
2λρ
P
X
j=1
θ2
j.
(8)
The elastic net involves two non-negative hyperparameters, λ and ρ, and includes two well known
regularizers as special cases. The ρ = 0 case corresponds to the lasso and uses an absolute value,
or “l1”, parameter penalization. The fortunate geometry of the lasso sets coeﬃcients on a subset
of covariates to exactly zero. In this sense, the lasso imposes sparsity on the speciﬁcation and can
thus be thought of as a variable selection method. The ρ = 1 case corresponds to ridge regression,
which uses an l2 parameter penalization, that draws all coeﬃcient estimates closer to zero but does
not impose exact zeros anywhere. In this sense, ridge is a shrinkage method that helps prevent
coeﬃcients from becoming unduly large in magnitude. For intermediate values of ρ, the elastic net
encourages simple models through both shrinkage and selection.
We adaptively optimize the tuning parameters, λ and ρ, using the validation sample. Our imple-
mentation of penalized regression uses the accelerated proximal gradient algorithm and accommo-
dates both least squares and Huber objective functions (see Appendix B.1 for more detail).
2.4
Dimension Reduction: PCR and PLS
Penalized linear models use shrinkage and variable selection to manage high dimensionality by forcing
the coeﬃcients on most regressors near or exactly to zero. This can produce suboptimal forecasts
when predictors are highly correlated. A simple example of this problem is a case in which all of the
predictors are equal to the forecast target plus an iid noise term. In this situation, choosing a subset
of predictors via lasso penalty is inferior to taking a simple average of the predictors and using this
as the sole predictor in a univariate regression.
The idea of predictor averaging, as opposed to predictor selection, is the essence of dimension
reduction. Forming linear combinations of predictors helps reduce noise to better isolate the signal in
predictors, and also helps de-correlate otherwise highly dependent predictors. Two classic dimension
reduction techniques are principal components regression (PCR) and partial least squares (PLS).
PCR consists of a two-step procedure. In the ﬁrst step, principal components analysis (PCA)
combines regressors into a small set of linear combinations that best preserve the covariance structure
12

among the predictors. In the second step, a few leading components are used in standard predictive
regression.
That is, PCR regularizes the prediction problem by zeroing out coeﬃcients on low
variance components.
A drawback of PCR is that it fails to incorporate the ultimate statistical objective—forecasting
returns—in the dimension reduction step. PCA condenses data into components based on the covari-
ation among the predictors. This happens prior to the forecasting step and without consideration of
how predictors associate with future returns.
In contrast, partial least squares performs dimension reduction by directly exploiting covariation
of predictors with the forecast target.11 PLS regression proceeds as follows. For each predictor j,
estimate its univariate return prediction coeﬃcient via OLS. This coeﬃcient, denoted ϕj, reﬂects the
“partial” sensitivity of returns to each predictor j. Next, average all predictors into a single aggregate
component with weights proportional to ϕj, placing the highest weight on the strongest univariate
predictors, and the least weight on the weakest. In this way, PLS performs its dimension reduction
with the ultimate forecasting objective in mind. To form more than one predictive component, the
target and all predictors are orthogonalized with respect to previously constructed components, and
the above procedure is repeated on the orthogonalized dataset. This is iterated until the desired
number of PLS components is reached.
Model. Our implementation of PCR and PLS begins from the vectorized version of the linear
model in equations (1)–(3). In particular, we reorganize the linear regression ri,t+1 = z′
i,tθ + ϵi,t+1 as
R = Zθ + E,
(9)
where R is the NT × 1 vector of ri,t+1, Z is the NT × P matrix of stacked predictors zi,t, and E is
a NT × 1 vector of residuals ϵi,t+1.
PCR and PLS take the same general approach to reducing the dimensionality. They both con-
dense the set of predictors from dimension P to a much smaller number of K linear combinations of
predictors. Thus, the forecasting model for both methods is written as
R = (ZΩK)θK + ˜E.
(10)
ΩK is P × K matrix with columns w1, w2, . . . , wK. Each wj is the set of linear combination weights
used to create the jth predictive components, thus ZΩK is the dimension-reduced version of the
original predictor set. Likewise, the predictive coeﬃcient θK is now a K ×1 vector rather than P ×1.
Objective Function and Computational Algorithm. PCR chooses the combination weights
ΩK recursively. The jth linear combination solves12
wj = arg max
w
Var(Zw),
s.t.
w′w = 1,
Cov(Zw, Zwl) = 0,
l = 1, 2, . . . , j −1.
(11)
11See Kelly and Pruitt (2013, 2015) for asymptotic theory of PLS regression and its application to forecasting risk
premia in ﬁnancial markets.
12For two vectors a and b, we denote Cov(a, b) := (a−¯a)⊺(b−¯b), where ¯a is the average of all entries of a. Naturally,
we deﬁne Var(a) := Cov(a, a).
13
