Intuitively, PCR seeks the K linear combinations of Z that most faithfully mimic the full predictor
set. The objective illustrates that the choice of components is not based on the forecasting objective
at all. Instead, the emphasis of PCR is on ﬁnding components that retain the most possible common
variation within the predictor set. The well known solution for (11) computes ΩK via singular value
decomposition of Z, and therefore the PCR algorithm is extremely eﬃcient from a computational
standpoint.
In contrast to PCR, the PLS objective seeks K linear combinations of Z that have maximal
predictive association with the forecast target. The weights used to construct jth PLS component
solve
wj = arg max
w
Cov2(R, Zw),
s.t.
w′w = 1,
Cov(Zw, Zwl) = 0,
l = 1, 2, . . . , j −1.
(12)
This objective highlights the main distinction between PCR and PLS. PLS is willing to sacriﬁce how
accurately ZΩK approximates Z in order to ﬁnd components with more potent return predictability.
The problem in (12) can be eﬃciently solved using a number of similar routines, the most prominent
being the SIMPLS algorithm of de Jong (1993).
Finally, given a solution for ΩK, θK is estimated in both PCR and PLS via OLS regression of
R on ZΩK. For both models, K is a hyperparameter that can be determined adaptively from the
validation sample.
2.5
Generalized Linear
Linear models are popular in practice, in part because they can be thought of as a ﬁrst-order approxi-
mation to the data generating process.13 When the “true” model is complex and nonlinear, restricting
the functional form to be linear introduces approximation error due to model misspeciﬁcation. Let
g⋆(zi,t) denote the true model and g(zi,t; θ) the functional form speciﬁed by the econometrician. And
let g(zi,t;bθ) and bri,t+1 denote the ﬁtted model and its ensuing return forecast. We can decompose a
model’s forecast error as:
ri,t+1 −bri,t+1 =
g⋆(zi,t) −g(zi,t; θ)
|
{z
}
approximation error
+
g(zi,t; θ) −g(zi,t;bθ)
|
{z
}
estimation error
+
ϵi,t+1
| {z }
intrinsic error
.
Intrinsic error is irreducible; it is the genuinely unpredictable component of returns associated with
news arrival and other sources of randomness in ﬁnancial markets. Estimation error, which arises
due to sampling variation, is determined by the data. It is potentially reducible by adding new
observations, though this may not be under the econometrician’s control.
Approximation error
is directly controlled by the econometrician, and is potentially reducible by incorporating more
ﬂexible speciﬁcations that improve the model’s ability to approximate the true model. But additional
ﬂexibility raises the risk of overﬁtting and destabilizing the model out-of-sample. In this and the
following subsections, we introduce nonparametric models of g(·) with increasing degrees of ﬂexibility,
13See White (1980) for a discussion of limitations of linear models as ﬁrst-order approximations.
14
