The details of our boosting procedure, typically referred to as gradient boosted regression trees
(GBRT), are described in Algorithm 4 of Appendix B.2. It starts by ﬁtting a shallow tree (e.g., with
depth L = 1). This over-simpliﬁed tree is sure to be a weak predictor with large bias in the training
sample. Next, a second simple tree (with the same shallow depth L) is used to ﬁt the prediction
residuals from the ﬁrst tree. Forecasts from these two trees are added together to form an ensemble
prediction of the outcome, but the forecast component from the second tree is shrunken by a factor
ν ∈(0, 1) to help prevent the model from overﬁtting the residuals. At each new step b, a shallow tree
is ﬁtted to the residuals from the model with b−1 trees, and its residual forecast is added to the total
with a shrinkage weight of ν. This is iterated until there are a total of B trees in the ensemble. The
ﬁnal output is therefore an additive model of shallow trees with three tuning parameters (L, ν, B)
which we adaptively choose in the validation step.
Random Forest. Like boosting, a random forest is an ensemble method that combines forecasts
from many diﬀerent trees. It is a variation on a more general procedure known as bootstrap aggrega-
tion, or “bagging” (Breiman, 2001). The baseline tree bagging procedure draws B diﬀerent bootstrap
samples of the data, ﬁts a separate regression tree to each, then averages their forecasts. Trees for
individual bootstrap samples tend to be deep and overﬁt, making their individual predictions in-
eﬃciently variable. Averaging over multiple predictions reduces this variation, thus stabilizing the
trees’ predictive performance.
Random forests use a variation on bagging designed to reduce the correlation among trees in
diﬀerent bootstrap samples. If, for example, ﬁrm size is the dominant return predictor in the data,
then most of the bagged trees will have low-level splits on size resulting in substantial correlation
among their ultimate predictions. The forest method de-correlates trees using a method known as
“dropout,” which considers only a randomly drawn subset of predictors for splitting at each potential
branch. Doing so ensures that, in the example, early branches for at least a few trees will split on
characteristics other than ﬁrm size. This lowers the average correlation among predictions to further
improve the variance reduction relative to standard bagging.
Depth L of the trees and number
of bootstrap samples B are the tuning parameters optimized via validation. Precise details of our
random forest implementation are described in Algorithm 3 of the appendix.
2.7
Neural Networks
The ﬁnal nonlinear method that we analyze is the artiﬁcial neural network. Arguably the most
powerful modeling device in machine learning, neural networks have theoretical underpinnings as
“universal approximators” for any smooth predictive association (Hornik et al., 1989; Cybenko,
1989). They are the currently preferred approach for complex machine learning problems such as
computer vision, natural language processing, and automated game-playing (such as chess and go).
Their ﬂexibility draws from the ability to entwine many telescoping layers of nonlinear predictor
interactions, earning the synonym “deep learning.” At the same time, their complexity ranks neural
networks among the least transparent, least interpretable, and most highly parameterized machine
learning tools.
18

Figure 2: Neural Networks
Output Layer
Input Layer
Hidden Layer 
Output Layer
Input Layer
f
f
f
f
f
Note: This ﬁgure provides diagrams of two simple neural networks with (right) or without (left) a hidden layer.
Pink circles denote the input layer and dark red circles denote the output layer. Each arrow is associated
with a weight parameter. In the network with a hidden layer, a nonlinear activation function f transforms
the inputs before passing them on to the output.
Model. We focus our analysis on traditional “feed-forward” networks. These consist of an “input
layer” of raw predictors, one or more “hidden layers” that interact and nonlinearly transform the
predictors, and an “output layer” that aggregates hidden layers into an ultimate outcome prediction.
Analogous to axons in a biological brain, layers of the networks represent groups of “neurons” with
each layer connected by “synapses” that transmit signals among neurons of diﬀerent layers. Figure
2 shows two illustrative examples.
The number of units in the input layer is equal to the dimension of the predictors, which we
set to four in this example (denoted z1, ..., z4). The left panel shows the simplest possible network
that has no hidden layers. Each of the predictor signals is ampliﬁed or attenuated according to
a ﬁve-dimensional parameter vector, θ, that includes an intercept and one weight parameter per
predictor. The output layer aggregates the weighted signals into the forecast θ0 + P4
k=1 zkθk; that
is, the simplest neural network is a linear regression model.
The model incorporates more ﬂexible predictive associations by adding hidden layers between
the inputs and output. The right panel of Figure 2 shows an example with one hidden layer that
contains ﬁve neurons. Each neuron draws information linearly from all of the input units, just as in
the simple network on the left. Then, each neuron applies a nonlinear “activation function” f to its
aggregated signal before sending its output to the next layer. For example, the second neuron in the
hidden layer transforms inputs into an output as x(1)
2
= f

θ(0)
2,0 + P4
j=1 zjθ(0)
2,j

. Lastly, the results
from each neuron are linearly aggregated into an ultimate output forecast:
g(z; θ) = θ(1)
0
+
5
X
j=1
x(1)
j θ(1)
j .
Thus, in this example, there are a total of 31= (4 + 1) × 5 + 6 parameters (ﬁve parameters to reach
19

each neuron and six weights to aggregate the neurons into a single output).
There are many choices to make when structuring a neural network, including the number of
hidden layers, the number of neurons in each layer, and which units are connected. Despite the
aforementioned “universal approximation” result that suggests the suﬃciency of a single hidden
layer, recent literature has shown that deeper networks can often achieve the same accuracy with
substantially fewer parameters.20
On the other hand, in small data sets simple networks with only a few layers and nodes often
perform best. Training a very deep neural network is challenging because it typically involves a
large number of parameters, because the objective function is highly non-convex, and because the
recursive calculation of derivatives (known as “back-propagation”) is prone to exploding or vanishing
gradients.
Selecting a successful network architecture by cross-validation is in general a diﬃcult task. It
is unrealistic and unnecessary to ﬁnd the optimal network by searching over uncountably many
architectures. Instead, we ﬁx a variety of network architectures ex ante and estimate each of these.
What we hope to achieve is reasonably lower bound on the performance of machine learning methods.
We consider architectures with up to ﬁve hidden layers. Our shallowest neural network has a
single hidden layer of 32 neurons, which we denoted NN1. Next, NN2 has two hidden layers with 32
and 16 neurons, respectively; NN3 has three hidden layers with 32, 16, and 8 neurons, respectively;
NN4 has four hidden layers with 32, 16, 8, 4 neurons, respectively; and NN5 has ﬁve hidden layers
with 32, 16, 8, 4, and 2 neurons, respectively.
We choose the number of neurons in each layer
according to the geometric pyramid rule (see Masters, 1993). All architectures are fully connected
so each unit receives an input from all units in the layer below. By comparing the performance of
NN1 through NN5, we can infer the trade-oﬀs of network depth in the return forecasting problem.21
There are many potential choices for the nonlinear activation function (such as sigmoid, hy-
perbolic, softmax, etc.). We use the same activation function at all nodes, and choose a popular
functional form in recent literature known as the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU), deﬁned as22
ReLU(x) =



0
if x < 0
x
otherwise,
which encourages sparsity in the number of active neurons, and allows for faster derivative evaluation.
Our neural network model has the following general formula. Let K(l) denote the number of
neurons in each layer l = 1, ..., L. Deﬁne the output of neuron k in layer l as x(l)
k . Next, deﬁne the
vector of outputs for this layer (augmented to include a constant, x(l)
0 ) as x(l) = (1, x(l)
1 , ..., x(l)
K(l))′. To
initialize the network, similarly deﬁne the input layer using the raw predictors, x(0) = (1, z1, ..., zN)′.
20Eldan and Shamir (2016) formally demonstrate that depth—even if increased by one layer—can be exponentially
more valuable than increasing width in standard feed-forward neural networks. Ever since the seminal work by Hinton
et al. (2006), the machine learning community has experimented and adopted deeper (and wider) networks, with as
many as 152 layers for image recognition, e.g., He et al. (2016a).
21We conﬁne the choices of architectures to a small set of ﬁve based on our limited sample size (compared to typical
neural network applications).
22See, e.g., Jarrett et al. (2009), Nair and Hinton (2010), and Glorot et al. (2011).
20

The recursive output formula for the neural network at each neuron in layer l > 0 is then
x(l)
k = ReLU

x(l−1)′θ(l−1)
k

,
(17)
with ﬁnal output
g(z; θ) = x(L−1)′θ(L−1).
(18)
The number of weight parameters in each hidden layer l is K(l)(1 + K(l−1)), plus another 1 + K(L−1)
weights for the output layer.
Objective Function and Computational Algorithm.
We estimate the neural network
weight parameters by minimizing the penalized l2 objective function of prediction errors. Unlike
tree-based algorithms that require “greedy” optimization, training a neural network, in principle,
allows for joint updates of all model parameters at each step of the optimization—a substantial
advantage of neural networks over trees. However, the high degree of nonlinearity and nonconvexity
in neural networks, together with their rich parameterization, make brute force optimization highly
computationally intensive (often to the point of infeasibility).
A common solution uses stochas-
tic gradient descent (SGD) to train a neural network. Unlike standard descent that uses the entire
training sample to evaluate the gradient at each iteration of the optimization, SGD evaluates the gra-
dient from a small random subset of the data. This approximation sacriﬁces accuracy for enormous
acceleration of the optimization routine.
For the same reasons described above (severe nonlinearity and heavy parameterization), regular-
ization of neural networks requires more care than the methods discussed above. In addition to l1
penalization of the weight parameters, we simultaneously employ four other regularization techniques
in our estimation: learning rate shrinkage, early stopping, batch normalization, and ensembles.
A critical tuning parameter in SGD is the learning rate, which controls the step size of the
descent. It is necessary to shrink the learning rate toward zero as the gradient approaches zero,
otherwise noise in the calculation of the gradient begins to dominate its directional signal. We adopt
the “learning rate shrinkage” algorithm of Kingma and Ba (2014) to adaptively control the learning
rate (described further in Algorithm 5 of the Appendix B.3).23
Next, “early stopping” is a general machine learning regularization tool. It begins from an initial
parameter guess that imposes parsimonious parameterization (for example, setting all θ values close
to zero). In each step of the optimization algorithm, the parameter guesses are gradually updated to
reduce prediction errors in the training sample. At each new guess, predictions are also constructed
for the validation sample, and the optimization is terminated when the validation sample errors begin
to increase. This typically occurs before the prediction errors are minimized in the training sample,
hence the name early stopping (see Algorithm 6). By ending the parameter search early, parameters
are shrunken toward the initial guess. It is a popular substitute to l2 penalization of θ parameters
23Relatedly, random subsetting at each SGD iteration adds noise to the optimization procedure, which itself serves
as a form of regularization. See, Wilson and Martinez (2003).
21
