because it achieves regularization at a much lower computational cost.24 Early stopping can be used
alone, or together with l1-regularization as we do in this paper.
“Batch normalization” (Ioﬀe and Szegedy, 2015) is a simple technique for controlling the variabil-
ity of predictors across diﬀerent regions of the network and across diﬀerent datasets. It is motivated
by the phenomenon of internal covariate shift in which inputs of hidden layers follow diﬀerent distri-
butions than their counterparts in the validation sample. This issue is constantly encountered when
ﬁtting deep neural networks that involve many parameters and rather complex structures. For each
hidden unit in each training step (a “batch”), the algorithm cross-sectionally de-means and variance
standardizes the batch inputs to restore the representation power of the unit.
Finally, we adopt an ensemble approach in training our neural networks (see also Hansen and
Salamon, 1990; Dietterich, 2000). In particular, we use multiple random seeds to initialize neural
network estimation and construct predictions by averaging forecasts from all networks. This reduces
prediction variance because the stochastic nature of the optimization can cause diﬀerent seeds to
produce diﬀerent forecasts.25
2.8
Performance Evaluation
To assess predictive performance for individual excess stock return forecasts, we calculate the out-
of-sample R2 as
R2
oos = 1 −
P
(i,t)∈T3(ri,t+1 −bri,t+1)2
P
(i,t)∈T3 r2
i,t+1
,
(19)
where T3 indicates that ﬁts are only assessed on the testing subsample, whose data never enter into
model estimation or tuning. R2
oos pools prediction errors across ﬁrms and over time into a grand
panel-level assessment of each model.
A subtle but important aspect of our R2 metric is that the denominator is the sum of squared
excess returns without demeaning. In many out-of-sample forecasting applications, predictions are
compared against historical mean returns. While this approach is sensible for the aggregate index or
long-short portfolios, for example, it is ﬂawed when it comes to analyzing individual stock returns.
Predicting future excess stock returns with historical averages typically underperforms a naive fore-
cast of zero by a large margin. That is, the historical mean stock return is so noisy that it artiﬁcially
lowers the bar for “good” forecasting performance. We avoid this pitfall by benchmarking our R2
against a forecast value of zero. To give an indication of the importance of this choice, when we
benchmark model predictions against historical mean stock returns, the out-of-sample monthly R2
of all methods rises by roughly three percentage points.
24Early stopping bears a comparatively low computation cost because it only partially optimizes, while the l2-
regularization, or more generally elastic net, search across tuning parameters and fully optimizes the model subject to
each tuning parameter guess. As usual, elastic net’s l1-penalty component encourages neurons to connect to limited
number of other neurons, while its l2-penalty component shrinks the weight parameters toward zero (a feature known
in the neural net literature as “weight-decay”). In certain circumstances, early stopping and weight-decay are shown
to be equivalent. See, e.g., Bishop (1995) and Goodfellow et al. (2016).
25Estimation with diﬀerent seeds can run independently in parallel which limits incremental computing time.
22
