To make pairwise comparisons of methods, we use the Diebold and Mariano (1995) test for
diﬀerences in out-of-sample predictive accuracy between two models.26 While time series dependence
in returns is suﬃciently weak, it is unlikely that the conditions of weak error dependence underlying
the Diebold-Mariano test apply to our stock-level analysis due of potentially strong dependence in
the cross section. We adapt Diebold-Mariano to our setting by comparing the cross-sectional average
of prediction errors from each model, instead of comparing errors among individual returns. More
precisely, to test the forecast performance of method (1) versus (2), we deﬁne the test statistic
DM12 = ¯d12/bσ ¯d12, where
d12,t+1 =
1
n3,t+1
n3
X
i=1

be(1)
i,t+1
2
−

be(2)
i,t+1
2
,
(20)
be(1)
i,t+1 and be(2)
i,t+1 denote the prediction error for stock return i at time t using each method, and
n3,t+1 is the number of stocks in the testing sample (year t + 1). Then ¯d12 and bσ ¯d12 denote the
mean and Newey-West standard error of d12,t over the testing sample.
This modiﬁed Diebold-
Mariano test statistic, which is now based on a single time series d12,t+1 of error diﬀerences with
little autocorrelation, is more likely to satisfy the mild regularity conditions needed for asymptotic
normality and in turn provide appropriate p-values for our model comparison tests.
2.9
Variable Importance and Marginal Relationships
Our goal in interpreting machine learning models is modest. We aim to identify covariates that have
an important inﬂuence on the cross-section of expected returns while simultaneously controlling for
the many other predictors in the system.
We discover inﬂuential covariates by ranking them according to a notion of variable importance,
which we denote as VIj for the jth input variable. We consider two diﬀerent notions of importance.
The ﬁrst is the reduction in panel predictive R2 from setting all values of predictor j to zero, while
holding the remaining model estimates ﬁxed (used, for example, in the context of dimension reduction
by Kelly et al., 2019). The second, proposed in the neural networks literature by Dimopoulos et al.
(1995), is the sum of squared partial derivatives (SSD) of the model to each input variable j, which
summarizes the sensitivity of model ﬁts to changes in that variable.27
As part of our analysis, we also trace out the marginal relationship between expected returns
26As emphasize by Diebold (2015), the model-free nature of the Diebold-Mariano test means that it should be
interpreted as a comparison of forecasts, and not as a comparison of “fully articulated econometric models.”
27In particular, SSD deﬁnes the jth variable importance as
SSDj =
X
i,t∈T1
 
∂g(z; θ)
∂zj

z=zi,t
!2
,
where, with a slight abuse of notation, zj in the denominator of the derivative denotes the jth element of the vector
of input variables. We measure SSD within the training set, T1. Note that due to non-diﬀerentiabilities in tree-based
models, the Dimopoulos et al. (1995) method is not applicable.
Therefore, when we conduct this second variable
importance analysis, we measure variable importance for random forests and boosted trees using mean decrease in
impurity (see, e.g., Friedman, 2001).
23
