1 Introduction
1.1 Motivation
To a greater extent than other mathematical disciplines, statistics is a product
of its time. If Francis Galton, Karl Pearson, Ronald Fisher, and Jerzy Neyman
had had access to computers, they may have created an entirely different
ﬁeld. Classical statistics relies on simplistic assumptions (linearity, indepen-
dence), in-sample analysis, analytical solutions, and asymptotic properties
partly because its founders had access to limited computing power. Today,
many of these legacy methods continue to be taught at university courses and
in professional certiﬁcation programs, even though computational methods,
such as cross-validation, ensemble estimators, regularization, bootstrapping,
and Monte Carlo, deliver demonstrably better solutions. In the words of
Efron and Hastie (2016, 53),
two words explain the classic preference for parametric models: mathema-
tical tractability. In a world of sliderules and slow mechanical arithmetic,
mathematical formulation, by necessity, becomes the computational tool of
choice. Our new computation-rich environment has unplugged the mathe-
matical bottleneck, giving us a more realistic, ﬂexible, and far-reaching body
of statistical techniques.
Financial problems pose a particular challenge to those legacy methods,
because economic systems exhibit a degree of complexity that is beyond the
grasp of classical statistical tools (López de Prado 2019b). As a consequence,
machine learning (ML) plays an increasingly important role in ﬁnance. Only a
few years ago, it was rare to ﬁnd ML applications outside short-term price
prediction, trade execution, and setting of credit ratings. Today, it is hard to ﬁnd
a use case where ML is not being deployed in some form. This trend is unlikely
to change, as larger data sets, greater computing power, and more efﬁcient
algorithms all conspire to unleash a golden age of ﬁnancial ML. The ML
revolution creates opportunities for dynamic ﬁrms and challenges for anti-
quated asset managers. Firms that resist this revolution will likely share
Kodak’s fate. One motivation of this Element is to demonstrate how modern
statistical tools help address many of the deﬁciencies of classical techniques in
the context of asset management.
Most ML algorithms were originally devised for cross-sectional data sets. This
limits their direct applicability to ﬁnancial problems, where modeling the time
series properties of data sets is essential. My previous book, Advances in Financial
Machine Learning (AFML; López de Prado 2018a), addressed the challenge of
modeling the time series properties of ﬁnancial data sets with ML algorithms, from
the perspective of an academic who also happens to be a practitioner.
1
Elements in Quantitative Finance

Machine Learning for Asset Managers is concerned with answering a differ-
ent challenge: how can we use ML to build better ﬁnancial theories? This is not
a philosophical or rhetorical question. Whatever edge you aspire to gain in
ﬁnance, it can only be justiﬁed in terms of someone else making a systematic
mistake from which you beneﬁt.1 Without a testable theory that explains your
edge, the odds are that you do not have an edge at all. A historical simulation of
an investment strategy’s performance (backtest) is not a theory; it is a (likely
unrealistic) simulation of a past that never happened (you did not deploy that
strategy years ago; that is why you are backtesting it!). Only a theory can pin
down the clear cause–effect mechanism that allows you to extract proﬁts against
the collective wisdom of the crowds – a testable theory that explains factual
evidence as well as counterfactual cases (x implies y, and the absence of y
implies the absence of x). Asset managers should focus their efforts on research-
ing theories, not backtesting trading rules. ML is a powerful tool for building
ﬁnancial theories, and the main goal of this Element is to introduce you to
essential techniques that you will need in your endeavor.
1.2 Theory Matters
A black swan is typically deﬁned as an extreme event that has not been observed
before. Someone once told me that quantitative investment strategies are use-
less. Puzzled, I asked why. He replied, “Because the future is ﬁlled with black
swans, and since historical data sets by deﬁnition cannot contain never-seen-
before events, ML algorithms cannot be trained to predict them.” I counter-
argued that, in many cases, black swans have been predicted.
Let me explain this apparent paradox with an anecdote. Back in the year
2010, I was head of high-frequency futures at a large US hedge fund. On May 6,
we were running our liquidity provision algorithms as usual, when around 12:30
ET, many of them started to ﬂatten their positions automatically. We did not
interfere or override the systems, so within minutes, our market exposure
became very small. This system behavior had never happened to us before.
My team and I were conducting a forensic analysis of what had caused the
systems to shut themselves down when, at around 14:30 ET, we saw the S&P
500 plunge, within minutes, almost 10% relative to the open. Shortly after, the
systems started to buy aggressively, proﬁting from a 5% rally into the market
close. The press dubbed this black swan the “ﬂash crash.” We were twice
surprised by this episode: ﬁrst, we could not understand how our systems
1 This is also true in the context of factor investing, where the systematic mistake can be explained
in terms of behavioral bias, mismatched investment horizons, risk tolerance, regulatory con-
straints, and other variables informing investors’ decisions.
2
Machine Learning for Asset Managers

predicted an event that we, the developers, did not anticipate; second, we could
not understand why our systems started to buy shortly after the market bottomed.
About ﬁve months later, an ofﬁcial investigation found that the crash was
likely caused by an order to sell 75,000 E-mini S&P 500 futures contracts at a
high participation rate (CFTC 2010). That large order contributed to a persistent
imbalance in the order ﬂow, making it very difﬁcult for market makers to ﬂip
their inventory without incurring losses. This toxic order ﬂow triggered stop-out
limits across market makers, who ceased to provide liquidity. Market makers
became aggressive liquidity takers, and without anyone remaining on the bid,
the market inevitably collapsed (Easley et al. 2011).
We could not have forecasted the ﬂash crash by watching CNBC or reading the
Wall Street Journal. To most observers, the ﬂash crash was indeed an unpredictable
black swan. However, the underlying causes of the ﬂash crash are very common.
Order ﬂow is almost never perfectly balanced. In fact, imbalanced order ﬂow is the
norm, with various degrees of persistency (e.g., measured in terms of serial correla-
tion). Our systems had been trained to reduce positions under extreme conditions of
order ﬂow imbalance. In doing so, they were trained to avoid the conditions that
shortly after caused the black swan. Once the market collapsed, our systems
recognized that the opportunity to buy at a 10% discount offset previous concerns
fromextremeorderﬂowimbalance,andtheytooklongpositionsuntiltheclose.This
experience illustrates the two most important lessons contained in this Element.
1.2.1 Lesson 1: You Need a Theory
Contrary to popular belief, backtesting is not a research tool. Backtests can never
prove that a strategy is a true positive, and they may only provide evidence that a
strategy is a false positive. Never develop a strategy solely through backtests.
Strategies must be supported by theory, not historical simulations. Your theories
must be general enough to explain particular cases, even if those cases are black
swans. The existence of black holes was predicted by the theory of general relativity
more than ﬁve decades before the ﬁrst black hole was observed. In the above story,
our market microstructure theory (which later on became known as the VPIN
theory; see Easley et al. 2011b) helped us predict and proﬁt from a black swan. Not
only that, but our theoretical work also contributed to the market’s bounce back (my
colleagues used to joke that we helped put the “ﬂash” into the “ﬂash crash”). This
Element contains some of the tools you need to discover your own theories.
1.2.2 Lesson 2: ML Helps Discover Theories
Consider the following approach to discovering new ﬁnancial theories. First,
you apply ML tools to uncover the hidden variables involved in a complex
3
Elements in Quantitative Finance

phenomenon. These are the ingredients that the theory must incorporate in
order to make successful forecasts. The ML tools have identiﬁed these
ingredients; however, they do not directly inform you about the exact equation
that binds the ingredients together. Second, we formulate a theory that con-
nects these ingredients through a structural statement. This structural
statement is essentially a system of equations that hypothesizes a particular
cause–effect mechanism. Third, the theory has a wide range of testable
implications that go beyond the observations predicted by the ML tools in
the ﬁrst step.2 A successful theory will predict events out-of-sample.
Moreover, it will explain not only positives (x causes y) but also negatives
(the absence of y is due to the absence of x).
In the above discovery process, ML plays the key role of decoupling the
search for variables from the search for speciﬁcation. Economic theories are
often criticized for being based on “facts with unknown truth value” (Romer
2016) and “generally phony” assumptions (Solow 2010). Considering the
complexity of modern ﬁnancial systems, it is unlikely that a researcher will be
able to uncover the ingredients of a theory by visual inspection of the data or by
running a few regressions. Classical statistical methods do not allow this
decoupling of the two searches.
Once the theory has been tested, it stands on its own feet. In this way, the
theory, not the ML algorithm, makes the predictions. In the above anecdote, the
theory, not an online forecast produced by an autonomous ML algorithm, shut
the position down. The forecast was theoretically sound, and it was not based on
some undeﬁned pattern. It is true that the theory could not have been discovered
without the help of ML techniques, but once the theory was discovered, the ML
algorithm played no role in the decision to close the positions two hours prior to
the ﬂash crash. The most insightful use of ML in ﬁnance is for discovering
theories. You may use ML successfully for making ﬁnancial forecasts; however,
that is not necessarily the best scientiﬁc use of this technology (particularly if
your goal is to develop high-capacity investment strategies).
1.3 How Scientists Use ML
An ML algorithm learns complex patterns in a high-dimensional space with
little human guidance on model speciﬁcation. That ML models need not be
speciﬁed by the researcher has led many to, erroneously, conclude that ML must
2 A theory can be tested with more powerful tools than backtests. For instance, we could investigate
which market makers lost money during the ﬂash crash. Did they monitor for order ﬂow
imbalance? Did market makers that monitor for order ﬂow imbalance fare better? Can we ﬁnd
evidence of their earlier retreat in the FIX messages of that day? A historical simulation of a
trading rule cannot give us this level of insight.
4
Machine Learning for Asset Managers

be a black box. In that view, ML is merely an “oracle,”3 a prediction machine
from which no understanding can be extracted. The black box view of ML is a
misconception. It is fueled by popular industrial applications of ML, where the
search for better predictions outweighs the need for theoretical understanding.
A review of recent scientiﬁc breakthroughs reveals radically different uses of
ML in science, including the following:
1 Existence: ML has been deployed to evaluate the plausibility of a theory
across all scientiﬁc ﬁelds, even beyond the empirical sciences. Notably, ML
algorithms have helped make mathematical discoveries. ML algorithms
cannot prove a theorem, however they can point to the existence of an
undiscovered theorem, which can then be conjectured and eventually proved.
In other words, if something can be predicted, there is hope that a mechanism
can be uncovered (Gryak et al., forthcoming).
2 Importance: ML algorithms can determine the relative informational con-
tent of explanatory variables (features, in ML parlance) for explanatory and/
or predictive purposes (Liu 2004). For example, the mean-decrease accuracy
(MDA) method follows these steps: (1) Fit a ML algorithm on a particular
data set; (2) derive the out-of-sample cross-validated accuracy; (3) repeat
step (2) after shufﬂing the time series of individual features or combinations
of features; (4) compute the decay in accuracy between (2) and (3). Shufﬂing
the time series of an important feature will cause a signiﬁcant decay in
accuracy. Thus, although MDA does not uncover the underlying mechanism,
it discovers the variables that should be part of the theory.
3 Causation: ML algorithms are often utilized to evaluate causal inference
following these steps: (1) Fit a ML algorithm on historical data to predict
outcomes, absent of an effect. This model is nontheoretical, and it is purely
driven by data (like an oracle); (2) collect observations of outcomes under the
presence of the effect; (3) use the ML algorithm ﬁt in (1) to predict the
observation collected in (2). The prediction error can be largely attributed to
the effect, and a theory of causation can be proposed (Varian 2014; Athey
2015).
4 Reductionist: ML techniques are essential for the visualization of large,
high-dimensional, complex data sets. For example, manifold learning algo-
rithms can cluster a large number of observations into a reduced subset of
peer groups, whose differentiating properties can then be analyzed (Schlecht
et al. 2008).
3 Here we use a common deﬁnition of oracle in complexity theory: a black box that is able to
produce a solution for any instance of a given computational problem.
5
Elements in Quantitative Finance

5 Retriever: ML is used to scan through big data in search of patterns that
humans failed to recognize. For instance, every night ML algorithms are fed
millions of images in search of supernovae. Once they ﬁnd one image with a
high probability of containing a supernova, expensive telescopes can be
pointed to a particular region in the universe, where humans will scrutinize
the data (Lochner et al. 2016). A second example is outlier detection. Finding
outliers is a prediction problem rather than an explanation problem. A ML
algorithm can detect an anomalous observation, based on the complex
structure it has found in the data, even if that structure is not explained to
us (Hodge and Austin 2004).
Rather than replacing theories, ML plays the critical role of helping scientists
form theories based on rich empirical evidence. Likewise, ML opens the
opportunity for economists to apply powerful data science tools toward the
development of sound theories.
1.4 Two Types of Overﬁtting
The dark side of ML’s ﬂexibility is that, in inexperienced hands, these algo-
rithms can easily overﬁt the data. The primary symptom of overﬁtting is a
divergence between a model’s in-sample and out-of-sample performance
(known as the generalization error). We can distinguish between two types of
overﬁtting: the overﬁtting that occurs on the train set, and the overﬁtting that
occurs on the test set. Figure 1.1 summarizes how ML deals with both kinds of
overﬁtting.
1.4.1 Train Set Overﬁtting
Train set overﬁtting results from choosing a speciﬁcation that is so ﬂexible that
it explains not only the signal, but also the noise. The problem with confounding
signal with noise is that noise is, by deﬁnition, unpredictable. An overﬁt model
will produce wrong predictions with an unwarranted conﬁdence, which in turn
will lead to poor performance out-of-sample (or even in a pseudo-out-of-
sample, like in a backtest).
ML researchers are keenly aware of this problem, which they address in three
complementary ways. The ﬁrst approach to correct for train set overﬁtting is
evaluating the generalization error, through resampling techniques (such as
cross-validation) and Monte Carlo methods. Appendix A describes these
techniques and methods in greater detail. The second approach to reduce train
set overﬁtting is regularization methods, which prevent model complexity
unless it can be justiﬁed in terms of greater explanatory power. Model
6
Machine Learning for Asset Managers

Overfitting
Training set
Generalization
error
(synthetic dataset)
Ensemble
methods
Regularization
Testing set
(backtest
overfitting)
Generalization
error
(synthetic dataset)
Report all trials
(number,
variance)
Resampling
(...)
Monte Carlo
(...)
Number of
variables
(LASSO)
Structure
(early stopping,
drop-out)
Deflated
Sharpe
Ratio / FWER
Resampling
(CPCV)
Monte Carlo
Figure 1.1 Solutions to two kinds of overﬁtting.

parsimony can be enforced by limiting the number of parameters (e.g., LASSO)
or restricting the model’s structure (e.g., early stopping). The third approach to
address train set overﬁtting is ensemble techniques, which reduce the variance
of the error by combining the forecasts of a collection of estimators. For
example, we can control the risk of overﬁtting a random forest on a train set
in at least three ways: (1) cross-validating the forecasts; (2) limiting the depth of
each tree; and (3) adding more trees.
In summary, a backtest may hint at the occurrence of train set overﬁtting,
which can be remedied using the above approaches. Unfortunately, backtests
are powerless against the second type of overﬁtting, as explained next.
1.4.2 Test Set Overﬁtting
Imagine that a friend claims to have a technique to predict the winning ticket at
the next lottery. His technique is not exact, so he must buy more than one
ticket. Of course, if he buys all of the tickets, it is no surprise that he will win.
How many tickets would you allow him to buy before concluding that his
method is useless? To evaluate the accuracy of his technique, you should
adjust for the fact that he has bought multiple tickets. Likewise, researchers
running multiple statistical tests on the same data set are more likely to make a
false discovery. By applying the same test on the same data set multiple times,
it is guaranteed that eventually a researcher will make a false discovery. This
selection bias comes from ﬁtting the model to perform well on the test set, not
the train set.
Another example of test set overﬁtting occurs when a researcher backtests a
strategy and she tweaks it until the output achieves a target performance. That
backtest–tweak–backtest cycle is a futile exercise that will inevitably end with
an overﬁt strategy (a false positive). Instead, the researcher should have spent
her time investigating how the research process misled her into backtesting a
false strategy. In other words, a poorly performing backtest is an opportunity to
ﬁx the research process, not an opportunity to ﬁx a particular investment
strategy.
Most published discoveries in ﬁnance are likely false, due to test set over-
ﬁtting. ML did not cause the current crisis in ﬁnancial research (Harvey et al.
2016). That crisis was caused by the widespread misuse of classical statistical
methods in ﬁnance, and p-hacking in particular. ML can help deal with the
problem of test set overﬁtting, in three ways. First, we can keep track of how
many independent tests a researcher has run, to evaluate the probability that at
least one of the outcomes is a false discovery (known as familywise error rate, or
FWER). The deﬂated Sharpe ratio (Bailey and López de Prado 2014) follows
8
Machine Learning for Asset Managers

a similar approach in the context of backtesting, as explained in Section 8. It
is the equivalent to controlling for the number of lottery tickets that your
friend bought. Second, while it is easy to overﬁt a model to one test set, it is
hard to overﬁt a model to thousands of test sets for each security. Those
thousands of test sets can be generated by resampling combinatorial splits of
train and test sets. This is the approached followed by the combinatorial
purged cross-validation method, or CPCV (AFML, chapter 12). Third, we
can use historical series to estimate the underlying data-generating process,
and sample synthetic data sets that match the statistical properties observed in
history. Monte Carlo methods are particularly powerful at producing syn-
thetic data sets that match the statistical properties of a historical series. The
conclusions from these tests are conditional to the representativeness of the
estimated data-generating process (AFML, chapter 13). The main advantage
of this approach is that those conclusions are not connected to a particular
(observed) realization of the data-generating process but to an entire distri-
bution of random realizations. Following with our example, this is equivalent
to replicating the lottery game and repeating it many times, so that we can rule
luck out.
In summary, there are multiple practical solutions to the problem of train set and
test set overﬁtting. These solutions are neither infallible nor incompatible, and my
advice is that you apply all of them. At the same time, I must insist that no backtest
can replace a theory, for at least two reasons: (1) backtests cannot simulate black
swans – only theories have the breadth and depth needed to consider the never-
before-seen occurrences; (2) backtests may insinuate that a strategy is proﬁtable,
but they do not tell us why. They are not a controlled experiment. Only a theory
can state the cause–effect mechanism, and formulate a wide range of predictions
and implications that can be independently tested for facts and counterfacts. Some
of these implications may even be testable outside the realm of investing. For
example, the VPIN theory predicted that market makers would suffer stop-outs
under persistent order ﬂow imbalance. Beyond testing whether order ﬂow imbal-
ance causes a reduction in liquidity, researchers can also test whether market
makers suffered losses during the ﬂash crash (hint: they did). This latter test can be
conducted by reviewing ﬁnancial statements, independently from the evidence
contained in exchange records of prices and quotes.
1.5 Outline
This Element offers asset managers a step-by-step guide to building ﬁnancial
theories with the help of ML methods. To that objective, each section uses what
we have learned in the previous ones. Each section (except for this introduction)
9
Elements in Quantitative Finance

contains an empirical analysis, where the methods explained are put to the test
in Monte Carlo experiments.
The ﬁrst step in building a theory is to collect data that illustrate how some
variables relate to each other. In ﬁnancial settings, those data often take the
form of a covariance matrix. We use covariance matrices to run regressions,
optimize portfolios, manage risks, search for linkages, etc. However, ﬁnancial
covariance matrices are notoriously noisy. A relatively small percentage of
the information they contain is signal, which is systematically suppressed by
arbitrage forces. Section 2 explains how to denoise a covariance matrix
without giving up the little signal it contains. Most of the discussion centers
on random matrix theory, but at the core of the solution sits an ML technique:
the kernel density estimator.
Many research questions involve the notion of similarity or distance.
For example, we may be interested in understanding how closely related
two variables are. Denoised covariance matrices can be very useful
for deriving distance metrics from linear relationships. Modeling nonlinear
relationships requires more advanced concepts. Section 3 provides an infor-
mation-theoretic framework for extracting complex signals from noisy data.
In particular, it allows us to deﬁne distance metrics with minimal assumptions
regarding the underlying variables that characterize the metric space. These
distance metrics can be thought of as a nonlinear generalization of the notion
of correlation.
One of the applications of distance matrices is to study whether some
variables are more closely related among themselves than to the rest, hence
forming clusters. Clustering has a wide range of applications across ﬁnance,
like in asset class taxonomy, portfolio construction, dimensionality reduction,
or modeling networks of agents. A general problem in clustering is ﬁnding
the optimal number of clusters. Section 4 introduces the ONC algorithm,
which provides a general solution to this problem. Various use cases for this
algorithm are presented throughout this Element.
Clustering is an unsupervised learning problem. Before we can delve into
supervised learning problems, we need to assess ways of labeling ﬁnancial data.
The effectiveness of a supervised ML algorithm greatly depends on the kind of
problem we attempt to solve. For example, it may be harder to forecast
tomorrow’s S&P 500 return than the sign of its next 5% move. Different
features are appropriate for different types of labels. Researchers should
consider carefully what labeling method they apply on their data. Section 5
discusses the merits of various alternatives.
AFML warned readers that backtesting is not a research tool. Feature impor-
tance is. A backtest cannot help us develop an economic or ﬁnancial theory.
10
Machine Learning for Asset Managers

In order to do that, we need a deeper understanding of what variables are
involved in a phenomenon. Section 6 studies ML tools for evaluating the
importance of explanatory variables, and explains how these tools defeat
many of the caveats of classical methods, such as the p-value. A particular
concern is how to overcome p-value’s lack of robustness under multicollinear-
ity. To tackle this problem, we must apply what we learned in all prior sections,
including denoising (Section 2), distance metrics (Section 3), clustering
(Section 4), and labeling (Section 5).
Once you have a ﬁnancial theory, you can use your discovery to develop an
investment strategy. Designing that strategy will require making some invest-
ment decisions under uncertainty. To that purpose, mean-variance portfolio
optimization methods are universally known and used, even though they are
notorious for their instability. Historically, this instability has been addressed in
a number of ways, such as introducing strong constraints, adding priors, shrink-
ing the covariance matrix, and other robust optimization techniques. Many asset
managers are familiar with instability caused by noise in the covariance matrix.
Fewer asset managers realize that certain data structures (types of signal) are
also a source of instability for mean-variance solutions. Section 7 explains why
signal can be a source of instability, and how ML methods can help correct it.
Finally, a ﬁnancial ML book would not be complete without a detailed
treatment of how to evaluate the probability that your discovery is false, as a
result of test set overﬁtting. Section 8 explains the dangers of backtest over-
ﬁtting, and provides several practical solutions to the problem of selection bias
under multiple testing.
1.6 Audience
If, like most asset managers, you routinely compute covariance matrices, use
correlations, search for low-dimensional representations of high-dimensional
spaces, build predictive models, compute p-values, solve mean-variance opti-
mizations, or apply the same test multiple times on a given data set, you need to
read this Element. In it, you will learn that ﬁnancial covariance matrices are
noisy and that they need to be cleaned before running regressions or computing
optimal portfolios (Section 2). You will learn that correlations measure a very
narrow deﬁnition of codependency and that various information-theoretic
metrics are more insightful (Section 3). You will learn intuitive ways of redu-
cing the dimensionality of a space, which do not involve a change of basis.
Unlike PCA, ML-based dimensionality reduction methods provide intuitive
results (Section 4). Rather than aiming for implausible ﬁxed-horizon predic-
tions, you will learn alternative ways of posing ﬁnancial prediction problems
that can be solved with higher accuracy (Section 5). You will learn modern
11
Elements in Quantitative Finance

alternatives to the classical p-values (Section 6). You will learn how to
address the instability problem that plagues mean-variance investment port-
folios (Section 7). And you will learn how to evaluate the probability that
your discovery is false as a result of multiple testing (Section 8). If you work
in the asset management industry or in academic ﬁnance, this Element is
for you.
1.7 Five Popular Misconceptions about Financial ML
Financial ML is a new technology. As it is often the case with new technologies,
its introduction has inspired a number of misconceptions. Below is a selection
of the most popular.
1.7.1 ML Is the Holy Grail versus ML Is Useless
The amount of hype and counterhype surrounding ML deﬁes logic. Hype
creates a set of expectations that may not be fulﬁlled for the foreseeable future.
Counterhype attempts to convince audiences that there is nothing special about
ML and that classical statistical methods already produce the results that ML-
enthusiasts claim.
ML critics sometimes argue that “caveat X in linear regression is no big
deal,” where X can either mean model misspeciﬁcation, multicollinearity,
missing regressors, nonlinear interaction effects, etc. In reality, any of these
violations of classical assumptions will lead to accepting uninformed vari-
ables (a false positive) and/or rejecting informative variables (a false nega-
tive). For an example, see Section 6.
Another common error is to believe that the central limit theorem some-
how justiﬁes the use of linear regression models everywhere. The argument
goes like this: with enough observations, Normality prevails, and linear
models provide a good ﬁt to the asymptotic correlation structure. This
“CLT Hail Mary pass” is an undergrad fantasy: yes, the sample mean con-
verges in distribution to a Gaussian, but not the sample itself! And that
converge only occurs if the observations are independent and identically
distributed. It takes a few lines of code to demonstrate that a misspeciﬁed
regression will perform poorly, whether we feed it thousands or billions of
observations.
Both extremes (hype and counterhype) prevent investors from recognizing
the real and differentiated value that ML delivers today. ML is modern statistics,
and it helps overcome many of the caveats of classical techniques that have
preoccupied asset managers for decades. See López de Prado (2019c) for
multiple examples of current applications of ML in ﬁnance.
12
Machine Learning for Asset Managers

1.7.2 ML Is a Black Box
This is perhaps the most widespread myth surrounding ML. Every research
laboratory in the world uses ML to some extent, so clearly ML is compatible
with the scientiﬁc method. Not only is ML not a black box, but as Section 6
explains, ML-based research tools can be more insightful than traditional
statistical methods (including econometrics). ML models can be interpreted
through a number of procedures, such as PDP, ICE, ALE, Friedman’s H-stat,
MDI, MDA, global surrogate, LIME, and Shapley values, among others. See
Molnar (2019) for a detailed treatment of ML interpretability.
Whether someone applies ML as a black box or as a white-box is a matter of
personal choice. The same is true of many other technical subjects. I personally
do not care much about how my car works, and I must confess that I have never
lifted the hood to take a peek at the engine (my thing is math, not mechanics).
So, my car remains a black box to me. I do not blame the engineers who
designed my car for my lack of curiosity, and I am aware that the mechanics
who work at my garage see my car as a white box. Likewise, the assertion that
ML is a black box reveals how some people have chosen to apply ML, and it is
not a universal truth.
1.7.3 Finance Has Insuﬃcient Data for ML
It is true that a few ML algorithms, particularly in the context of price predic-
tion, require a lot of data. That is why a researcher must choose the right
algorithm for a particular job. On the other hand, ML critics who wield this
argument seem to ignore that many ML applications in ﬁnance do not require
any historical data at all. Examples include risk analysis, portfolio construction,
outlier detection, feature importance, and bet-sizing methods. Each section in
this Element demonstrates the mathematical properties of ML without relying
on any historical series. For instance, Section 7 evaluates the accuracy of an
ML-based portfolio construction algorithm via Monte Carlo experiments.
Conclusions drawn from millions of Monte Carlo simulations teach us some-
thing about the general mathematical properties of a particular approach. The
anecdotal evidence derived from a handful of historical simulations is no match
to evaluating a wide range of scenarios.
Other ﬁnancial ML applications, like sentiment analysis, deep hedging, credit
ratings, execution, and private commercial data sets, enjoy an abundance of
data. Finally, in some settings, researchers can conduct randomized controlled
experiments, where they can generate their own data and establish precise
cause–effect mechanisms. For example, we may reword a news article and
compare ML’s sentiment extraction with a human’s conclusion, controlling for
13
Elements in Quantitative Finance

various changes. Likewise, we may experiment with the market’s reaction to
alternative implementations of an execution algorithm under comparable
conditions.
1.7.4 The Signal-to-Noise Ratio Is Too Low in Finance
There is no question that ﬁnancial data sets exhibit lower signal-to-noise ratio
than those used by other ML applications (a point that we will demonstrate in
Section 2). Because the signal-to-noise ratio is so low in ﬁnance, data alone are
not good enough for relying on black box predictions. That does not mean that
ML cannot be used in ﬁnance. It means that we must use ML differently, hence
the notion of ﬁnancial ML as a distinct subject of study. Financial ML is not the
mere application of standard ML to ﬁnancial data sets. Financial ML comprises
ML techniques specially designed to tackle the speciﬁc challenges faced by
ﬁnancial researchers, just as econometrics is not merely the application of
standard statistical techniques to economic data sets.
The goal of ﬁnancial ML ought to be to assist researchers in the discovery of
new economic theories. The theories so discovered, and not the ML algorithms,
will produce forecasts. This is no different than the way scientists utilize ML
across all ﬁelds of research.
1.7.5 The Risk of Overﬁtting Is Too High in Finance
Section 1.4 debunked this myth. In knowledgeable hands, ML algorithms
overﬁt less than classical methods. I concede, however, that in nonexpert
hands ML algorithms can cause more harm than good.
1.8 The Future of Financial Research
The International Data Corporation has estimated that 80% of all available data
are unstructured (IDC 2014). Many of the new data sets available to researchers
are high-dimensional, sparse, or nonnumeric. As a result of the complexities of
these new data sets, there is a limit to how much researchers can learn using
regression models and other linear algebraic or geometric approaches. Even
with older data sets, traditional quantitative techniques may fail to capture
potentially complex (e.g., nonlinear and interactive) associations among vari-
ables, and these techniques are extremely sensitive to the multicollinearity
problem that pervades ﬁnancial data sets (López de Prado 2019b).
Economics and ﬁnance have much to beneﬁt from the adoption of ML
methods. As of November 26, 2018, the Web of Science4 lists 13,772 journal
4 www.webofknowledge.com.
14
Machine Learning for Asset Managers

articles on subjects in the intersection of “Economics” and “Statistics &
Probability.” Among those publications, only eighty-nine articles (0.65%)
contain any of the following terms: classiﬁer, clustering, neural network, or
machine learning. To put it in perspective, out of the 40,283 articles in the
intersection of “Biology” and “Statistics & Probability,” a total of 4,049
(10.05%) contained any of those terms, and out of the 4,994 articles in the
intersection of “Chemistry, Analytical” and “Statistics & Probability,” a total of
766 (15.34%) contained any of those terms.
The econometric canon predates the dawn of digital computing. Most econo-
metric models were devised for estimation by hand and are a product of their time.
In the words of Robert Tibshirani, “people use certain methods because that is how
it all started and that’s what they are used to. It’s hard to change it.”5 Students in the
twenty-ﬁrst century should not be overexposed to legacy technologies. Moreover,
the most successful quantitative investment ﬁrms in history rely primarily on ML,
not econometrics, and the current predominance of econometrics in graduate
studies prepares students for academic careers, not for jobs in the industry.
This does not mean that econometrics has outlived its usability. Researchers
asked to decide between econometrics and ML are presented with a false
choice. ML and econometrics complement each other, because they have
different strengths. For example, ML can be particularly helpful at suggesting
to researchers the ingredients of a theory (see Section 6), and econometrics can
be useful at testing a theory that is well grounded on empirical observation. In
fact, sometimes we may want to apply both paradigms at the same time, like in
semiparametric methods. For example, a regression could combine observable
explanatory variables with control variables that are contributed by an ML
algorithm (Mullainathan and Spiess 2017). Such approach would address the
bias associated with omitted regressors (Clarke 2005).
1.9 Frequently Asked Questions
Over the past few years, attendees at seminars have asked me all sorts of
interesting questions. In this section I have tried to provide a short answer to
some of the most common questions. I have also added a couple of questions
that I am still hoping that someone will ask one day.
In Simple Terms, What Is ML?
Broadly speaking, ML refers to the set of algorithms that learn complex patterns
in a high-dimensional space without being speciﬁcally directed. Let us break
5 https://qz.com/1206229/this-is-the-best-book-for-learning-modern-statistics-its-free/.
15
Elements in Quantitative Finance

that deﬁnition into its three components. First, ML learns without being speci-
ﬁcally directed, because researchers impose very little structure on the data.
Instead, the algorithm derives that structure from the data. Second, ML learns
complex patterns, because the structure identiﬁed by the algorithm may not be
representable as a ﬁnite set of equations. Third, ML learns in a high-dimensional
space, because solutions often involve a large number of variables, and the
interactions between them.
For example, we can train an ML algorithm to recognize human faces by
showing it examples. We do not deﬁne what a face is, hence the algorithm learns
without our direction. The problem is never posed in terms of equations, and in
fact the problem may not be expressible in terms of equations. And the algo-
rithm uses an extremely large number of variables to perform this task, includ-
ing the individual pixels and the interaction between the pixels.
In recent years, ML has become an increasingly useful research tool through-
out all ﬁelds of scientiﬁc research. Examples include drug development, gen-
ome research, new materials, and high-energy physics. Consumer products and
industrial services have quickly incorporated these technologies, and some of
the most valuable companies in the world produce ML-based products and
services.
How Is ML Diﬀerent from Econometric Regressions?
Researchers use traditional regressions to ﬁt a predeﬁned functional form to
a set of variables. Regressions are extremely useful when we have a high
degree of conviction regarding that functional form and all the interaction
effects that bind the variables together. Going back to the eighteenth
century, mathematicians developed tools that ﬁt those functional forms
using estimators with desirable properties, subject to certain assumptions
on the data.
Starting in the 1950s, researchers realized that there was a different way to
conduct empirical analyses, with the help of computers. Rather than imposing a
functional form, particularly when that form is unknown ex ante, they would
allow algorithms to ﬁgure out variable dependencies from the data. And rather
than making strong assumptions on the data, the algorithms would conduct
experiments that evaluate the mathematical properties of out-of-sample predic-
tions. This relaxation in terms of functional form and data assumptions, com-
bined with the use of powerful computers, opened the door to analyzing
complex data sets, including highly nonlinear, hierarchical, and noncontinuous
interaction effects.
Consider the following example: a researcher wishes to estimate the survival
probability of a passenger on the Titanic, based on a number of variables, such
16
Machine Learning for Asset Managers

as gender, ticket class, and age. A typical regression approach would be to ﬁt a
logit model to a binary variable, where 1 means survivor and 0 means
deceased, using gender, ticket class, and age as regressors. It turns out that,
even though these regressors are correct, a logit (or probit) model fails to
make good predictions. The reason is that logit models do not recognize that
this data set embeds a hierarchical (treelike) structure, with complex interac-
tions. For example, adult males in second class died at a much higher rate than
each of these attributes taken independently. In contrast, a simple “classiﬁca-
tion tree” algorithm performs substantially better, because we allow the
algorithm to ﬁnd that hierarchical structure (and associated complex interac-
tions) for us.
As it turns out, hierarchical structures are omnipresent in economics and
ﬁnance (Simon 1962). Think of sector classiﬁcations, credit ratings, asset
classes, economic linkages, trade networks, clusters of regional economies,
etc. When confronted with these kinds of problems, ML tools can complement
and overcome the limitations of econometrics or similar traditional statistical
methods.
How Is ML Diﬀerent from Big Data?
The term big data refers to data sets that are so large and/or complex that
traditional statistical techniques fail to extract and model the information
contained in them. It is estimated that 90% of all recorded data have been
created over the past two years, and 80% of the data is unstructured (i.e., not
directly amenable to traditional statistical techniques).
In recent years, the quantity and granularity of economic data have
improved dramatically. The good news is that the sudden explosion of admin-
istrative, private sector, and micro-level data sets offers an unparalleled
insight into the inner workings of the economy. The bad news is that these
data sets pose multiple challenges to the study of economics. (1) Some of
the most interesting data sets are unstructured. They can also be nonnumerical
and noncategorical, like news articles, voice recordings, or satellite images.
(2) These data sets are high-dimensional (e.g., credit card transactions.)
The number of variables involved often greatly exceeds the number of obser-
vations, making it very difﬁcult to apply linear algebra solutions. (3) Many of
these data sets are extremely sparse. For instance, samples may contain a large
proportion of zeros, where standard notions such as correlation do not work
well. (4) Embedded within these data sets is critical information regarding
networks of agents, incentives, and aggregate behavior of groups of people.
ML techniques are designed for analyzing big data, which is why they are
often cited together.
17
Elements in Quantitative Finance

How Is the Asset Management Industry Using ML?
Perhaps the most popular application of ML in asset management is price
prediction. But there are plenty of equally important applications, like hedging,
portfolio construction, detection of outliers and structural breaks, credit ratings,
sentiment analysis, market making, bet sizing, securities taxonomy, and many
others. These are real-life applications that transcend the hype often associated
with expectations of price prediction.
For example, factor investing ﬁrms use ML to redeﬁne value. A few years
ago, price-to-earnings ratios may have provided a good ranking for value, but
that is not the case nowadays. Today, the notion of value is much more
nuanced. Modern asset managers use ML to identify the traits of value, and
how those traits interact with momentum, quality, size, etc. Meta-labeling
(Section 5.5) is another hot topic that can help asset managers size and time
their factor bets.
High-frequency trading ﬁrms have utilized ML for years to analyze
real-time exchange feeds, in search for footprints left by informed traders.
They can utilize this information to make short-term price predictions or to
make decisions on the aggressiveness or passiveness in order execution.
Credit rating agencies are also strong adopters of ML, as these algorithms
have demonstrated their ability to replicate the ratings generated by credit
analysts. Outlier detection is another important application, since ﬁnancial
models can be very sensitive to the presence of even a small number of
outliers. ML models can help improve investment performance by ﬁnding
the proper size of a position, leaving the buy-or-sell decision to traditional or
fundamental models.
And Quantitative Investors Speciﬁcally?
All of the above applications, and many more, are relevant to quantitative
investors. It is a great time to be a quant. Data are more abundant than ever,
and computers are ﬁnally delivering the power needed to make effective use of
ML. I am particularly excited about real-time prediction of macroeconomic
statistics, following the example of MIT’s Billion Prices Project (Cavallo and
Rigobon 2016). ML can be specially helpful at uncovering relationships that
until now remained hidden, even in traditional data sets. For instance, the
economic relationships between companies may not be effectively described
by traditional sector-group-industry classiﬁcations, such as GICS.6 A network
approach, where companies are related according to a variety of factors, is likely
6 www.msci.com/gics.
18
Machine Learning for Asset Managers

to offer a richer and more accurate representation of the dynamics, strengths,
and vulnerabilities of speciﬁc segments of the stock or credit markets (Cohen
and Frazzini 2008).
What Are Some of the Ways That ML Can Be Applied
to Investor Portfolios?
Portfolio construction is an extremely promising area for ML (Section 7). For
many decades, the asset management industry has relied on variations and
reﬁnements of Markowitz’s efﬁcient frontier to build investment portfolios. It
is known that many of these solutions are optimal in-sample, however, they can
perform poorly out-of-sample due to the computational instabilities involved in
convex optimization. Numerous classical approaches have attempted, with
mixed success, to address these computational instabilities. ML algorithms
have shown the potential to produce robust portfolios that perform well out-
of-sample, thanks to their ability to recognize sparse hierarchical relationships
that traditional methods miss (López de Prado 2016).
What Are the Risks? Is There Anything That Investors Should
Be Aware of or Look Out For?
Finance is not a plug-and-play subject as it relates to ML. Modeling ﬁnancial
series is harder than driving cars or recognizing faces. The reason is, the signal-
to-noise ratio in ﬁnancial data is extremely low, as a result of arbitrage forces
and nonstationary systems. The computational power and functional ﬂexibility
of ML ensures that it will always ﬁnd a pattern in the data, even if that pattern is
a ﬂuke rather than the result of a persistent phenomenon. An “oracle” approach
to ﬁnancial ML, where algorithms are developed to form predictions divorced
from all economic theory, is likely to yield false discoveries. I have never heard
a scientist say “Forget about theory, I have this oracle that can answer anything,
so let’s all stop thinking, and let’s just believe blindly whatever comes out.”
It is important for investors to recognize that ML is not a substitute for
economic theory, but rather a powerful tool for building modern economic
theories. We need ML to develop better ﬁnancial theories, and we need ﬁnancial
theories to restrict ML’s propensity to overﬁt. Without this theory–ML inter-
play, investors are placing their trust on high-tech horoscopes.
How Do You Expect ML to Impact the Asset Management
Industry in the Next Decade?
Today, the amount of ML used by farmers is staggering: self-driving tractors,
drones scanning for irregular patches of land, sensors feeding cattle and
19
Elements in Quantitative Finance

administering nutrients as needed, genetically engineered crops, satellite images
for estimating yields, etc. Similarly, I think in ten years we will look back, and ML
will be an important aspect of asset management. And just like in the farming
industry, although this transformation may not happen overnight, it is clear that
there is only one direction forward.
Economic data sets will only get bigger, and computers will only get more
powerful. Most asset managers will fail either by not evolving or by rushing into
the unknown without fully recognizing the dangers involved in the “oracle”
approach. Only a few asset managers will succeed by evolving in a thoughtful
and responsible manner.
How Do You Expect ML to Impact Financial Academia
in the Next Decade?
Imagine if physicists had to produce theories in a universe where the
fundamental laws of nature are in a constant ﬂux; where publications
have an impact on the very phenomenon under study; where experimen-
tation is virtually impossible; where data are costly, the signal is dim, and
the system under study is incredibly complex . . . I feel utmost admiration
for how much ﬁnancial academics have achieved in the face of paramount
adversity.
ML has a lot to offer to the academic profession. First, ML provides the
power and ﬂexibility needed to ﬁnd dim signals in the sea of noise caused by
arbitrage forces. Second, ML allows academics to decouple the research
process into two stages: (1) search for important variables irrespective of
functional form, and (2) search for a functional form that binds those vari-
ables. López de Prado (2019b) demonstrates how even small speciﬁcation
errors mislead researchers into rejecting important variables. It is hard to
overstate the relevance of decoupling the speciﬁcation search from the vari-
ables search. Third, ML offers the possibility of conducting simulations on
synthetic data. This is as close as ﬁnance will ever get to experimentation, in
the absence of laboratories. We live an exciting time to do academic research
on ﬁnancial systems, and I expect tremendous breakthroughs as more ﬁnan-
cial researchers embrace ML.
Isn’t Financial ML All about Price Prediction?
One of the greatest misunderstandings I perceive from reading the press is the
notion that ML’s main (if not only) objective is price prediction. Asset pricing is
undoubtedly a very worthy endeavor, however its importance is often over-
stated. Having an edge at price prediction is just one necessary, however entirely
20
Machine Learning for Asset Managers

insufﬁcient, condition to be successful in today’s highly competitive market.
Other areas that are equally important are data processing, portfolio construc-
tion, risk management, monitoring for structural breaks, bet sizing, and
detection of false investment strategies, just to cite a few.
Consider the players at the World Series of Poker. The cards are shufﬂed
and distributed randomly. These players obviously cannot predict what cards
will be handed to players with any meaningful accuracy. And yet, the same
handful of players ends up in top positions year after year. One reason is, bet
sizing is more important than card prediction. When a player receives a good
hand, he evaluates the probability that another player may hold a strong hand
too, and bets strategically. Likewise, investors may not be able to predict
prices, however they may recognize when an out-of-the-normal price has
printed, and bet accordingly. I am not saying that bet sizing is the key to
successful investing. I am merely stating that bet sizing is at least as important
as price prediction, and that portfolio construction is arguably even more
important.
Why Don’t You Discuss a Wide Range of ML Algorithms?
The purpose of this Element is not to introduce the reader to the vast popula-
tion of ML algorithms used today in ﬁnance. There are two reasons for that.
First, there are lengthy textbooks dedicated to the systematic exposition of
those algorithms, and another one is hardly needed. Excellent references
include James et al. (2013), Hastie et al. (2016), and Efron and Hastie
(2016). Second, ﬁnancial data sets have speciﬁc nuisances, and the success
or failure of a project rests on understanding them. Once we have engineered
the features and posed the problem correctly, choosing an algorithm plays a
relatively secondary role.
Allow me to illustrate the second point with an example. Compare an
algorithm that forecasted a change of 1, but received a realized change of 3,
with another algorithm that forecasted a change of −1, but received a realized
change of 1. In both cases, the forecast error is 2. In many industrial applica-
tions, we would be indifferent between both errors. That is not the case in
ﬁnance. In the ﬁrst instance, an investor makes one-third of the predicted
proﬁt, whereas in the second instance the investor suffers a loss equal to the
predicted proﬁt. Failing to predict the size is an opportunity loss, but failing to
predict the sign is an actual loss. Investors penalize actual losses much more
than opportunity losses. Predicting the sign of an outcome is often more
important than predicting its size, and a reason for favoring classiﬁers over
regression methods in ﬁnance. In addition, it is common in ﬁnance to ﬁnd that
the sign and size of an outcome depend on different features, so jointly
21
Elements in Quantitative Finance

forecasting the sign and size of an outcome with a unique set of features can
lead to subpar results.7 ML experts who transition into ﬁnance from other
ﬁelds often make fundamental mistakes, like posing problems incorrectly, as
explained in López de Prado (2018b). Financial ML is a subject in its own
right, and the discussion of generic ML algorithms is not the heart of the
matter.
Why Don’t You Discuss a Speciﬁc Investment Strategy,
Like Many Other Books Do?
There are plenty of books in the market that provide recipes for
implementing someone else’s investment strategy. Those cookbooks
show us how to prepare someone else’s cake. This Element is different.
I want to show you how you can use ML to discover new economic and
ﬁnancial theories that are relevant to you, on which you can base your
proprietary investment strategies. Your investment strategies are just the
particular implementation of the theories that ﬁrst you must discover
independently. You cannot bake someone else’s cake and expect to retain
it for yourself.
1.10 Conclusions
The purpose of this Element is to introduce ML tools that are useful for
discovering economic and ﬁnancial theories. Successful investment strategies
are speciﬁc implementations of general theories. An investment strategy that
lacks a theoretical justiﬁcation is likely to be false. Hence, a researcher should
concentrate her efforts on developing a theory, rather than of backtesting
potential strategies.
ML is not a black box, and it does not necessarily overﬁt. ML tools
complement rather than replace the classical statistical methods. Some
of ML’s strengths include (1) Focus on out-of-sample predictability over
variance adjudication; (2) usage of computational methods to avoid
relying on (potentially unrealistic) assumptions; (3) ability to “learn”
complex speciﬁcations, including nonlinear, hierarchical, and noncontin-
uous interaction effects in a high-dimensional space; and (4) ability to
disentangle the variable search from the speciﬁcation search, in a manner
robust to multicollinearity and other substitution effects.
7 See López de Prado (2018a) for a discussion of meta-labeling algorithms, where the sign and size
decision is made by independent algorithms.
22
Machine Learning for Asset Managers

1.11 Exercises
1 Can quantitative methods be used to predict events that never happened
before? How could quantitative methods predict a black swan?
2 Why is theory particularly important in ﬁnance and economics? What is the
best use of ML in ﬁnance?
3 What are popular misconceptions about ﬁnancial ML? Are ﬁnancial data sets
large enough for ML applications?
4 How does ML control for overﬁtting? Is the signal-to-noise ratio too low in
ﬁnance for allowing the use of ML?
5 Describe a quantitative approach in ﬁnance that combines classical and ML
methods. How is ML different from a large regression? Describe ﬁve appli-
cations of ﬁnancial ML.
23
Elements in Quantitative Finance
