MORE PRAISE FOR
Making Sense of Chaos
“This is the book I’ve been waiting for. It reinvents economics in terms of
computerized agent-based modeling and complex adaptive systems theory
developed over four decades. In many situations, ‘complexity economics’ is
more predictive than classical economics and therefore provides a better
basis for public policy. Doyne Farmer’s life work with Santa Fe Institute is
embodied here.”
Stewart Brand, founder of the Long Now Foundation and editor of The
Whole Earth Catalog
“It can seem daunting to try to understand the globally connected, fast-
moving, technology-driven, financialized economy of today; but there
could be no better guide to this complex landscape than Doyne Farmer. This
is a compelling book for anybody concerned about our economic future.”
Dame Diane Coyle, author of Cogs and Monsters
“After 2008, everybody except conventional economists seemed to realise
that conventional economics is failing us. I applaud this bold and exciting
new approach, born out of the 21st century rather than the 19th. It’s about
time!”
Brian Eno
“In this riveting book, Doyne Farmer profoundly unravels the role played
by complex systems in our economy. From the time he was living in a tent
while working on climate models on the American west, to his more recent
years in the hallowed halls of Oxford University, Farmer’s lifelong journey
is a testament to the creativity and perseverance needed to succeed in the
rugged landscapes of multidisciplinary science.”
César Hidalgo, author of Why Information Grows
“I can’t think of a better person to help us make sense of chaos than one of
the founders of the field of chaos theory, J. Doyne Farmer. A physicist by

training, but with plenty of financial and economic street cred, Farmer takes
on the formidable task of making complexity economics understandable,
fascinating, and fun. And he succeeds!”
Andrew W. Lo, author of Adaptive Markets
“Doyne Farmer condenses a lifetime’s worth of seminal contributions to
chaos theory within this captivating book, and describes an ongoing
paradigm shift within economics that can better address the problems facing
our world by acknowledging and harnessing complexity. His genius is
indisputable!”
Scott Page, author of The Model Thinker
“Standard economics has failed us when it comes to the challenge of
climate change, and in this remarkable book Doyne Farmer explains why—
and shows that a more complex understanding of how economies work
yields insights that can help us see, and build, a workable future. Farmer’s
insights are more general, extending to all kinds of realms; indeed, it’s
exciting to sense the intellectual ground being broken here. But it’s also of
the highest practical importance; heeding his thoughtful counsel offers a
path out of the box canyon where we’re currently stuck as a species.”
Bill McKibben, author of The End of Nature
“Our greatest challenges, such as climate change, force us to move beyond
linear thinking to grapple with their complexities. Doyne Farmer’s book
shows us how to do so, bringing some clarity to the chaos. I gobbled it up—
I hope it gets into the hands (and heads) of those who want to understand
our most pressing problems and work towards solving them.”
Hannah Ritchie, author of Not the End of the World
“Doyne Farmer is the world’s leading thinker on technological change. For
decades he has focused on the question of how we can make sense of the
data of today to see where the world is going tomorrow. This wonderful
book applies these insights to economics, addressing the big global issues
of environmental sustainability, and the well-being and prosperity of people
around the world.”
Max Roser, Founder of Our World in Data

“This book is a real achievement from which I learned a great deal. The
economics profession should be much more open to Farmer-type
complexity approaches. I hope this book is an inspiration to young scholars
from many disciplines concerned with economic questions.”
Lawrence Summers, former US Secretary of the Treasury
“Mainstream economics achieved an impressive level of mathematical
rigor, but at the expense of grossly simplified assumptions and an exclusive
focus on the equilibrium, making it ineffective in helping us solve real-
world problems. Is ‘predictive economics’ even possible? In this remarkable
book, Doyne Farmer, a cofounder of the modern science of chaos, shows
that it is. He convincingly argues that we need to build realistic agent-based
models, grounded in data, that will enable us to find effective ways to run
our economy and navigate societal challenges. A must-read.”
Peter Turchin, author of End Times: Elites, Counter-Elites, and the Path of
Political Disintegration
...
