Introduction
Being an optimist, I have hope that the profession [of economics] will
someday get into a scientific mode, based on anthropological observation
of behavior and computer simulation of interaction.
Barbara Bergmann, pioneer of micro-simulation (1980)1
We live in an age of increasing complexity – an era of accelerating
technology and global interconnection that arguably holds more promise,
and more peril, than any other in human history. New means of flourishing
lie tantalizingly at our fingertips, but Armageddon is all too easy to
imagine. The fossil fuels that power the global economy have generated
remarkable wealth, but they threaten to destroy it through climate change,
an immense tsunami rolling toward us from the future. Automation and
artificial intelligence are creating prosperity for some and unemployment
for others. Financial crises and growing inequality have contributed to
global polarization and the retreat of democracy.
Many of these problems are rooted in the economy.2 Climate change is
caused by economic activity, automation is intended to increase economic
productivity, and financial crises and inequality are the result of poor
management of the economy. Public policymaking for guiding the economy
relies on theories and models that frame government debates, refine
options, and provide arguments for and against proposed changes. Just as
important, economic models and theories shape our intuition and affect how
we think about the world and the decisions we make.
Unfortunately, the guidance provided by existing economic models has
often failed. The 2008 global economic crisis offers a good example. A
couple of years before the crisis started, top economists at the New York
Federal Reserve Bank became concerned about the possible dangers of a

crash in the housing market. They asked the Federal Reserve Bank US
model (FRB/US), one of the most well-developed economic models in the
world, what would happen to the national economy if the average house
price dropped by 20 per cent.3 ‘Not much,’ was the answer.4
The economists’ concerns were remarkably prescient: Between January
2007 and January 2009, the average price of a house sold in the US dropped
by about 23 per cent. The FRB/US model’s prediction had been horribly
wrong, underestimating the effect on the US economy by a factor of 20. At
the time, the financial crisis of 2008 was the worst period of global
economic decline since the Great Depression of the 1930s. In the United
States alone, five million people lost their jobs, unemployment rose to 10
per cent and the economy lost some $10 trillion – and the effect on the rest
of the world was even bigger. The failure of economic models was
universal. The President of the European Central Bank, Jean-Claude
Trichet, later confessed to his colleagues, ‘As a policymaker during the
crisis, I found the available models of limited help. In fact, I would go
further: In the face of the crisis, we felt abandoned by conventional tools.’5
Contemporary science and technology can help us understand and solve
the world’s problems in ways that differ dramatically from those offered by
the ‘conventional tools’ of economics. We are now able to collect data on
economic activity at an unprecedented scale. Modern computers are capable
of modeling the global economy with a remarkable level of fidelity and
detail, and could be used to guide us through crises and help create an
economy that is sustainable, fair and prosperous.
This is not happening, at least within mainstream economics. There have
been improvements to the conventional tools, but they don’t go nearly far
enough. The problems are inherent in the conceptual framework that
dominates the profession. While this framework is useful for well-specified
problems, like designing a more efficient auction or understanding the
strategy of labor negotiations, it is ill-suited to addressing big, messy,
complicated, real-world problems. The core assumptions of mainstream
economics don’t match reality, and the methods based on them don’t scale
well from small problems to big problems and are unable to take full
advantage of the huge advances in data and technology. For important
global issues, such as climate change, standard economic theory’s wrong
answers have provided a rationale for inaction, leading us to the brink of
global catastrophe. Nobel Prizes have been given to economists whose

theories were based on idealized arguments with no empirical support,
providing fodder for neoliberal policies that led to extreme inequality and
fueled sociopolitical polarization.
This book is not about criticizing economics – there are plenty of books
doing that already. It is about how to do economics differently to take proper
advantage of big data and computer power, to create economic models that
make better predictions and to give better policy advice about the hard
problems facing the world. To be clear, this book is mostly about
macroeconomics – the branch of economics that focuses on large-scale
phenomena like inflation and unemployment – and finance, which is about
money and investments. We will focus exclusively on economic theory,
rather than economic data analysis using statistical methods. This is called
econometrics in economics and machine learning in the field of artificial
intelligence. (In both cases, models are formed simply by fitting functions
to data – economists tend to favor linear functions, while computer
scientists prefer neural nets.)
By theory, I mean building models of the world based on assumptions
about how it works. Newton’s laws of gravity and motion, for example,
make it possible to predict the motion of comets and planets and explain
why the planets move as they do. Statistical methods, in contrast, illuminate
regularities in data and exploit them for prediction without making
underlying assumptions. Econometrics has begun to analyze large data sets
and is currently yielding many important results, while machine learning is
exploding. Nonetheless, though statistical analysis is extremely useful, there
are fundamental limits to what it can do.6 Statistical analysis can help us
build a picture of the world as it is, but it can make inferences about the
future only if the underlying behavior remains the same. In a genuinely new
situation, statistical regularities may shift. A more reliable way to anticipate
what will happen when the world changes is with a theory – as long as it is
based on mechanisms that do not change. A famous example of why this is
so important in economics is the Lucas critique, which I describe in Chapter
5.
Economics is fundamentally harder than physics because, unlike planets,
people can think, and their behavior can change as a result. Economic
theory has to explain the behavior of agents, like households or firms, who
make decisions, such as what to consume, where to work, how much to
work, where to invest, what to produce, how much to produce, what price to

charge and how to innovate. There is a standard template for building
economic theories that incorporate agents’ ability to reason, which evolved
over the last 150 years and gelled into its present form in the 1970s. This
template, which I will call standard economic theory, assigns each agent a
utility function describing her preferences. For example, in standard
macroeconomic models, households get utility from consumption and firms
get utility from making profits while minimizing risk. Under standard
economic theory, each agent makes decisions that make her own utility as
large as possible. To find these decisions and understand their economic
consequences, economists write down and solve equations that express this
in mathematical terms. This is the basis of all economic theories that are
taught in textbooks, and all the theoretical models that economists use to
evaluate new policies and provide guidance to the economy.
The science of complexity economics offers a completely different
alternative. Complexity economics uses ideas and methods from the science
of complex systems, an interdisciplinary movement I helped found in the
1980s that spans the physical, biological and social sciences.7 Complex
systems is the study of emergent phenomena. These occur when the
behavior of a system as a whole is qualitatively different from that of its
individual parts. A good example is the brain: An individual neuron is a
relatively simple device that takes in stimuli from other neurons and
produces new stimuli. An individual neuron is not conscious, but somehow
the 85 billion neurons in the human brain work together to produce
consciousness and thought.
The economy is a wonderful example of a complex system, with many
different emergent phenomena. The economy allows us to support each
other by specializing – concentrating our effort on what we do best, while
letting others do what they do best. By coordinating our efforts, it allows us
to build things like rocket ships or laptops that no individual could ever
build on her own.
While standard economic theory can sometimes provide valuable insight
about emergence, this is not its strength – it was built for other purposes. In
contrast, complex-systems scientists have identified and developed a
standard toolkit of concepts and methods that they use to understand
emergent phenomena such as brains, ant colonies, the internet or cities.
Complexity economists like me are rebels who have adapted the complex-
systems toolkit to study economics. I’m part of a band of some fifty-or-so

complexity economists worldwide (the term was coined by Stanford
economist W. Brian Arthur, one of its pioneers).8 Complexity economists
are a loose-knit group who often have divergent views. Some aspects of the
perspective I present in this book are held in common; many are my own.
Complexity economics is completely different from standard economic
theory. To begin, standard economic theory and complexity economics use
very different models for how agents reason and make decisions. Standard
economics usually assumes forward-looking agents who are intelligent
enough to reason their way through any problem. These hypothetical
rational agents are a bit like Star Trek’s Mr Spock: They use all available
information to make the best possible decision – the one that yields highest
utility. While the now-mainstream field of behavioral economics draws on
facts from psychology and sociology to challenge this view, derisively
referring to rational agents as ‘Homo economicus’, there is still no widely
used workable substitute. Although behavioral economics is now almost
universally accepted, the economic models that continue to influence public
policy are still largely based on Homo economicus. This is because it is hard
to incorporate the way real people reason into standard economic theory.
The elements of standard economic theory were designed to work together
as a whole, and when some are modified the others become inappropriate.
Creating economic models that effectively incorporate behavioral realism to
make useful predictions may be the most important problem in economics
today.
Complexity economics, conversely, assumes from the outset that agents
are boundedly rational, meaning they make imperfect decisions and have
limited ability to reason. Our models for boundedly rational agents are less
prescribed – they can be based on psychology experiments, census data,
expert opinions or a variety of other sources (see Chapter 6). Agents can
learn to achieve goals, but they typically only partially achieve them.
The tools of the trade are very different. Standard economics models are
written in terms of equations, and standard economists solve them by hand,
if they can, or with computers if they can’t. Though we use equations too,
computer simulation is the workhorse of complexity economics. Digital
technology enables us to create analogs of the real world inside the
computer, sometimes called digital twins. Essential events in the real world
have their counterparts in a simulated world. Scientists now use computer
simulations to study just about everything – galaxy formation, protein-

folding, the brain, epidemics, battle tactics and traffic jams. While
mainstream economists use computers to solve equations, this is not
simulation in the usual sense because there is no attempt to create analogs
for how things actually happen in the real world.
The simulations used in complexity economics are called agent-based
models.9 As the name emphasizes, the individual building blocks of these
models – such as households, firms or governments – make decisions; they
have agency.10 Algorithms describing how each agent makes decisions are
programmed into the computer. As the agents gather information and make
their decisions, their actions change the state of the economy, which in turn
generates new information, causing the agents to make new decisions, and
so on. The simulations can be repeated indefinitely, to study the interactions
of individual agents over time. In agent-based models, economic
phenomena emerge from the bottom up, just as they do in the real world.
The algorithms programmed into the computer to model decision-making
might consist of simple behavioral rules that social scientists have
uncovered, like ‘imitate your neighbors’ or obvious rules of thumb that
everyone follows, like ‘buy undervalued assets’. Or they might be learning
algorithms that capture how agents adapt their decisions over time to
improve their effectiveness. Computers can easily deal with complicated,
messy facts, enabling us to model decision-making with as much realism as
we wish. And there are additional benefits of this realism: In the presence of
uncertainty, simple rules of thumb can be surprisingly effective –
sometimes more effective than complicated reasoning.11
There are many advantages to using simulations rather than
mathematical equations, but one of the most important is the ability to
model the diversity of the actors in the world – what economists call
heterogeneity.12 Modeling heterogeneity is a hot topic in mainstream
macroeconomics, but it is very hard to fit this into the standard framework.
Computers, in contrast, easily keep track of diverse agents, making it
possible to do this as realistically as needed.
The theoretical frameworks of standard economics and complexity
economics are also very different. Standard economics draws heavily on
mathematical methods from the theory of optimization. This is like finding
the highest peak in a landscape (except that here it is an abstract landscape
representing utility). Standard economists like to prove theorems about their
models whenever they can. We complexity economists also use

mathematics, but usually do so to understand something observed in
simulations. The mathematical tools are taken from a much broader palette,
using methods and concepts from fields as diverse as dynamical systems,
statistical physics, ecology and evolutionary biology.
Last but not least, standard economic theory assumes from the outset that
transactions only take place when supply equals demand, a state that is
called equilibrium. Complexity-economics models, in contrast, do not
necessarily assume equilibrium, but regard it as an emergent property when
it happens.
Taken together, all these elements lead to a very different way of dealing
with change. Change in the economy can come from without: Think of the
COVID pandemic, which was an outside force affecting the economy.
Change can also come from within, like the financial crisis of 2008, which
arose via the economy acting on itself. Standard economics has a difficult
time dealing with changes that arise from within the economy. The leading
mainstream models of the financial crisis, for example, have to postulate the
existence of outside ‘shocks’ to generate the necessary change.13 It is
obvious that is not how it really happened, but standard models can only
explain it ‘as if’ it happened this way. In contrast, agent-based models are
inherently dynamical, making it natural to explain how the economy
changes from within. We will see examples in Chapters 3, 7 and 11
illustrating how complexity economics replaces ‘as-if’ reasoning with ‘as-
is’ reasoning, providing more sensible explanations for how the economy
changes from within itself.
Perhaps the biggest advantage of complexity economics is its ability to
solve hard problems. A model is tractable if it is easy to build and use to
answer questions. Standard economic theory yields tractable models in
simple settings, but this breaks down as things get complicated – it becomes
too hard to solve the equations, and it becomes increasingly difficult to add
new features to a pre-existing model. As a result, when a problem gets
complicated, mainstream economists are forced to oversimplify by leaving
things out.
The financial crisis of 2008 is a good example where this leads to
problems.14 All the models at the time ignored the possibility that
homeowners and businesses might default on their loans. Economists knew
that default was important, but including it in their models was difficult, so
they left it out. As it happened, default played a central role in the crisis.

The traditional models, updated since the crisis, now include default, but
only in a simplified fashion – the revised models still omit many essential
economic factors that may well figure in future crises.15 There is no model
based on standard economic theory that comes close to including all the
facets of the economy that could potentially lead us into trouble again.16
Making realistic models requires good data. Agent-based models are
naturally suited to make use of the vast quantities of data currently
available. Worldwide, tens of millions of firms and billions of households
make trillions of transactions annually. It would be extraordinarily useful to
build a detailed map of the global economy, but, remarkably, no such map
exists. If we built one, it would show us the structure of the economy in
detail and enable us to track its changes over time. We are now developing
agent-based economic models at the level of individual firms and
households that can use such data. These models study the economy from
the bottom up: Macroeconomics emerges from microeconomics.
The choice between standard economic theory and agent-based models
reflects a broader debate in social science. Milton Friedman, a prominent
twentieth-century economist, argued that models should be evaluated solely
on how good their predictions are, rather than on the plausibility of their
assumptions.17 Even if the assumptions of a model are far-fetched, he wrote,
the economy may behave ‘as if’ they are true. He used the example of
expert billiards players, who may not understand the laws of physics but
play billiards as if they did. Behavioral economics has made it abundantly
clear that people don’t make decisions in the way that standard economic
models assume they do. Nonetheless, to justify their models, economic
theorists continue to assert that the economy behaves ‘as if’ people did.
There is universal agreement that models should be judged based on
their ability to predict empirical facts. The debate is whether this should be
the only criterion. In social science, models often fit the facts loosely and no
model fits them tightly. We should be very suspicious of models that require
implausible ‘as-if’ arguments. Instead, I believe we should follow what I
call the principle of verisimilitude: Models should fit the facts and their
assumptions should be plausible. Assumptions that seem wrong from the
outset are more likely to lead to false conclusions than plausible
assumptions. We need to replace ‘as-if’ reasoning with ‘as-is’ reasoning.
The principle of verisimilitude recognizes that models need to contain
the key features of the phenomena they attempt to explain, but they needn’t

be literal representations of the world; models are abstractions, and we
don’t need to capture every detail. When we talk about building
simulations, we aren’t trying to create The Matrix. Verisimilitude just means
capturing the essential components as realistically as we can. Good models
should be as simple as possible, but no simpler. Agent-based models can be
complicated or simple; computers easily keep track of details that are
complicated to state mathematically, so we can include as many features as
we need to. Most important, we can easily add new features without
changing existing features, incrementally increasing the verisimilitude of
our models of the world.
There is more to complexity economics than just simulations. As already
noted, it draws on conceptual frameworks that have been developed in other
fields. We will see examples where it is useful to start by modeling
economic agents ‘as if’ they make decisions at random, and then add
enough intelligence to make a model with more verisimilitude that fits the
facts. For this purpose, methods from statistical physics – which were built
to cope with the random behavior of atoms – are very useful.
The insight that the economy allows workers to be specialists goes back
to Adam Smith’s 1776 book The Wealth of Nations.18 The theory of ecology,
which was developed in the middle of the twentieth century, is essentially a
theory about specialists. Grass is a specialist at the job of converting
sunlight, soil and water into grass. Zebras are specialists at the job of eating
grass and turning it into zebras, and lions are specialists in eating zebras and
turning them into lions. Homo economicus, who can solve any problem,
does not need to specialize. In contrast, the boundedly rational agents of
complexity economics are specialists who use their limited abilities for
what they do best. In Chapter 3 we will develop the analogy between
ecosystems and economies and show how it can be used to explain an
important aspect of economic growth. And in Chapters 10 and 11 we will
show how it can be used to explain market malfunction, providing tools for
regulators to anticipate and prevent (or at least ameliorate) financial crises.
Many of the ideas for complexity economics were articulated in the
1950s by Herbert Simon, a remarkable polymath and a key innovator in the
fields of economics, artificial intelligence, cognitive psychology,
management, public administration and political science. Even though
Simon won the 1978 Nobel Prize in economics, the mainstream never
followed his lead, and complexity economics has so far remained at the

periphery of the economics profession. You might ask, ‘If complexity
economics has been around so long, why didn’t it already take over the
mainstream?’ The short answer is that in Simons’s day we lacked the
computer power, data and understanding of human decision-making
necessary to execute his vision. Fortunately for us, computers are now
roughly a billion times faster than they were then, and our data capabilities
are similarly greater. Just as computer scientists have used this new power
to make great leaps forward in artificial intelligence and machine learning,
complexity economists are beginning to take advantage of it as well. In the
past five years or so this has allowed complexity economics to transition
from a qualitative to a quantitative science, and we are in the process of
moving from the conceptual to the practical phase of model deployment.
While we complexity economists sit on the fringe of academic
economics, our models are beginning to be used for commercial purposes.
Some of our ideas are beginning to inform models used by central banks to
monitor financial markets in order to avert the next meltdown. In other
applications under development, our models could help deal with rising
inequality or find the best paths for developing countries. They can predict
responses to such major transitions as automation or the switch to green
energy and help us make those transitions more smoothly.
A concrete example where complexity economics can make a big
difference is climate change, which is perhaps the most urgent problem the
world faces right now. The source of the problem is the economy, which
produces and uses the fossil fuels that create greenhouse gases. We have
good models for why the global climate is warming – models that are
convincing to almost all scientists. In contrast, economic models for
preventing climate change are highly controversial, yielding remarkably
divergent answers. The 2018 Nobelist William Nordhaus, using a standard
macroeconomic model, has argued that the economic cost of climate-
change mitigation is so high that we should make changes relatively slowly
and allow the Earth to eventually warm by 3.4°C (about 6°F).19 In contrast,
my colleagues and I have shown that rapidly converting to renewable
energy within a couple of decades will help keep global warming closer to
1.5°C, while likely saving us many trillions of dollars (see Chapter 13).
Resolving this controversy, and doing so quickly, is essential to our future!
The new science of complexity economics involves a radical change in
how economics is done. The fact that the intellectual framework is so

different means a complete makeover of tools, skills and knowledge base –
a cultural sea change. Not surprisingly, such a momentous shift is strongly
opposed by the academic mainstream, as revolutions always are. For
example, even though it is both innovative and useful, the model for the
COVID pandemic described in the prologue could never be published in a
‘top’ economics journal. Why? Because it cannot be solved mathematically
and, most importantly, it lacks utility maximizing agents, and thus violates
the central dogma of standard economic theory. The academic departments
where complexity economists work are typically not economics
departments, but rather have names like Computational Social Science or,
in my case, Geography and the Environment.20
Despite these barriers, complexity economics is beginning to get support
from institutions that are unhappy with the conventional tools, including a
few avant-garde central banks. Commercial applications are under
development. With modern technology we can now accomplish things that
early pioneers like Herb Simon could only dream of. The time is ripe for
complexity economics to take off.
Bringing complexity economics to fruition will require substantial time
and resources. Many challenging problems still have to be solved.
Nonetheless, the chances of success are high and the payoff could be
enormous. We need to make this revolution happen as soon as possible; the
fate of the world hangs in the balance.
...
