PART I:
What is Complexity Economics?
I should admit that I have very little formal education in economics. I was a
physics major as an undergraduate at Stanford. My only encounter with
economics was in 1971, during spring of my sophomore year, when I took
Economics 1, a large lecture class with hundreds of students. The professor,
John Gurley, was a prominent economist who was an expert on the Chinese
and Soviet economies. His lectures were clear, he was a good teacher and
the math was easy, but I found many of the ideas that he stated as facts hard
to believe. For example, he drew two curves on the board, one for price vs
supply and another for price vs demand, and stated that the price was the
point where they intersected.
Because I was borrowing my way through college, I wanted to get my
money’s worth, and I always sat in the first row and asked questions.1 I
raised my hand and asked him how the price arrived there. If the demand
curve suddenly shifted, how would the price adjust? How quickly could it
move? Didn’t we need to worry that it might under or overshoot? If things
changed really quickly, maybe the price couldn’t track at all? Professor
Gurley couldn’t provide convincing answers.
When I looked into this question thirty years later, I discovered that
several prominent economists had worked hard to answer the same
questions, without much success.2 Economists generally simply assume that
prices are at equilibrium, defined as the point where supply equals demand.
The idea of equilibrium originated in the latter half of the nineteenth
century with the work of the French economist Leon Walras. He justified
how the price could get to the intersection of supply and demand via a
procedure called tatonnement (French for ‘trial and error’) that was used in
the Paris stock market at the time.3 Because this process is cumbersome and
time consuming it is no longer used in modern stock markets. In fact, in
most modern markets transactions are made at prices where supply does not
equal demand, and in some markets – like housing markets – they can be

very different. As we will see, one of the contributions of complexity
economics (my own work included) is in understanding how prices move
when markets operate out of equilibrium, and demonstrating that this can be
important.
My next encounter with economics came in the summer of 1987, at a
conference called ‘The Economy as an Evolving Complex System’ at the
Santa Fe Institute (SFI), an interdisciplinary home for the study of
complexity, where I was an external professor.4 SFI has grown since then,
but it is still a small place, with about eight residential faculty members,
though it has a much larger external faculty and a steady stream of visitors.
Talks are given almost every day, on topics ranging across all of science,
from anthropology to physics to zoology. At lunchtime or tea there are
typically people from many different disciplines, and the discussions are
often wide ranging, stimulating and fun.
This particular meeting was organized by two Nobel Prize winners –
Stanford economist Kenneth Arrow and condensed-matter physicist Philip
Anderson – who had invited ten economists and ten scientists from other
disciplines (physics, biology and computer science) to participate. We met
for two weeks in the former Christo Rey convent, which the Institute had
just rented – its first physical location after two years as a virtual institution.
The meeting took place in the chapel, which retained its stained-glass
windows, but with the altar and cross removed and replaced by the
speakers’ lectern. At the time, I was a staff scientist at the Center for
Nonlinear Studies at Los Alamos, and economics was not a particular
concern. However, I was curious, and I was honored by the invitation, so I
accepted.
In the first week, the economists gave us a fascinating crash course in
economics. My impression was that they assumed that, since physicists are
good at mathematics, we would team up and help them solve their math
problems. This was not what happened. We physicists were fine with their
mathematics and didn’t have much to add, but we were skeptical of their
assumptions. At that point in time, the theory of rational expectations still
dominated economics. Then, as now, all standard economic theories
assumed some sort of equilibrium. The physicists had a reflexive reaction
against both notions. To us, economic equilibrium was a potentially
dangerous approximation and rational expectations seemed completely
unrealistic. Our view was that people are not consistently rational and that

economic theory needed to take human psychology into account. The
nascent field of behavioral economics was attempting to do just that, but at
that time it was still off the radar of the economists at the conference. There
was consequently a great deal of arguing. Physicists tend to view
themselves as the kings of the physical sciences, and economists view
themselves as the kings of the social sciences, and they can both be
arrogant. (At one point, Phil Anderson, who was famous for being
shockingly blunt, exclaimed to the economists, ‘You don’t really believe
that, do you?!’ and Harvard economist Lawrence Summers weighed in with
‘You physicists all have a Tarzan complex.’) Despite the tensions at the
meeting, I learned an enormous amount and came away with a renewed
interest in economics. It was obviously a field full of contradictions and bad
assumptions, suggesting that it could be a rewarding place to pursue
innovative research.
My interest in economics grew even more after meeting the Yale
economist John Geanakoplos, whose friends all call him John G., when he
directed the economics program at SFI in 1990–1991. In those days, there
was a weekly SFI basketball game at a nearby park, and John G. and I were
both regulars, which helped us get to know each other. One of our favorite
pursuits was to argue about the pros and cons of the founding principles of
economics. John taught me an enormous amount, and our dialogue
eventually led to a 2009 paper called ‘The Virtues and Vices of Equilibrium
and the Future of Financial Economics’, which presents a synthesis of our
converging view that ‘economics needs to move in new directions if it is to
continue to make progress’.5
...
