3.
Understanding the Metabolism of
Civilization
The labour process [. . .] is purposeful activity aimed at the production of
use-values. It is an appropriation on what exists in nature for the
requirements of man. It is the universal condition for the metabolic
interaction between man and nature [. . .] common to all forms of society in
which human beings live.
Karl Marx (1867)1
Back in the 1980s, in the early days of complex-systems science, the main
focus was on the problem of self-organization.2 How do organized
configurations of matter, like life or the brain, spontaneously emerge from
the disorganized background following the creation of the universe? While
important and fascinating, this is a problem that will likely take centuries if
not millennia to solve, and so far we have made only incremental progress.
As the science of complex systems matured, it branched out to tackle easier
problems with more immediate practical applications. Some of the most
important early successes involved networks.3 The pioneering sociologist
Mark Granovetter introduced the concept of social networks, as discussed
earlier, in which the nodes are people or firms and the links between them
can take many different forms. He showed how the economic relationships
between people or firms are ‘embedded’ in social networks, making them
behave differently than they would in an abstract market setting.
Complex-systems scientists such as Mark Newman, my colleague at SFI,
embraced the idea of networks and developed new mathematical methods
for applications to data.4 They showed how networks could be used to
understand and improve many different real-world systems, such as how to

structure connections between internet hubs to make them more reliable and
less prone to sabotage, or how to allocate vaccines to ensure the maximum
effect in reducing the spread of disease.
Network modeling is one of the few complex-systems ideas that has
made its way into mainstream economics. Stanford economist Matthew
Jackson (like me, an external faculty member of SFI) has produced a body
of insightful work on the role of networks in economics, showing, for
example, how social networks influence employment and inequality.5
Representing a system as a network begins by identifying its building
blocks and their interactions: asking, ‘What are the most important nodes?’
and ‘Are there communities? If so, what are they?’ (Mathematically
speaking, a community is a set of nodes that interact with each other much
more strongly than they do with other nodes.) Websites provide a good
example. The most important websites are not necessarily those with the
most traffic or those that are linked to the largest number of other websites.
Rather, they are the websites that are linked to the largest number of other
important websites. Although this sounds circular, network theory provides
a way to unravel this conundrum and identify the websites that are the most
important. To see how the algorithm works, imagine a ‘random walker’ that
starts at a random node (website) in the network. The walker then randomly
jumps to one of the websites that the starting website is linked to. This
process is repeated many times as the walker wanders through all the nodes.
The importance of any one of these websites is proportional to the
frequency with which it is visited. This algorithm, which is called
PageRank, was patented by Larry Page and Sergey Brin and is used in the
Google search engine.6
Network analysis is also useful for understanding lending between
banks. In the interbank-lending network, banks are nodes and loans
between banks are links. If a bank cannot pay back its lenders, this may
cause the lenders to default as well, setting off a chain reaction. Suppose
you’re a regulator and want to keep the financial system from collapsing.
Which banks are most important? If you can prop up only a few, which
should you choose? The biggest banks? The banks that lend to the largest
number of other banks? In fact, the answer turns out to be similar to the
story for websites: The most important banks are those connected to the
largest number of other important banks.7 The same PageRank algorithm
that was invented for web pages can be used to identify the banks whose

collapse would cause the most harm. This makes it possible to identify the
best banks to support during a financial crisis, and has been used by
organizations such as the European Central Bank to identify Systemically
Important Financial Institutions. That the same basic idea can be used to
understand systems as different as banks and the internet (and many others)
illustrates the value of complex-systems thinking. We’ll say more about the
important applications to the financial system in Part III.
Network theory offers a conceptual framework that helps us analyze
ecologies of specialists in the economy. This approach has practical
applications, like making better predictions about economic growth or
understanding how quickly the job force can adapt to technological change.
In this chapter, I present a static network model for production networks
that was developed in mainstream economics, and discuss how my
collaborators and I modified it to successfully predict economic growth.
This was a key step in constructing the model that successfully predicted
the economic impact of the COVID pandemic discussed in the Prologue.
The economy is like a metabolism
My introduction to networks came about because of my interest in the
origin of life. My early papers on networks, in the mid 1980s, were written
in collaboration with Norman Packard.8 We developed the concept of meta-
dynamical systems – networks that could change in response to their
environment and also evolve over time. In one of the papers, we teamed up
with Stuart Kauffman, a remarkably creative medical doctor and
developmental biologist who joined SFI’s faculty a few years later, to make
a model for the prebiotic origin of life. We used networks to ask whether
metabolisms might have existed even before the origin of life as we know it
on the Earth now. In other words, we posited the existence of a possible
simpler form of life that you might call proto-life, which might have been a
precursor to prokaryotes, the earliest of Earth’s life forms.9
Richard Bagley, a chemistry graduate student at UC San Diego, came to
Los Alamos to work with me and wrote his thesis there, under my
supervision. Rick’s thesis was a model for the origin of proto-life. It built on
the abstract chemical networks that Stuart, Norman and I had developed,
going beyond our schematic efforts and explicitly simulating polymer nodes
and the chemical reactions linking them.10 His work showed that our

hypothesis of the spontaneous emergence of a prebiotic metabolism was
indeed plausible.
The simulated metabolism that Rick built is closely analogous to the way
goods and services are produced in the economy. But before I can explain
why this analogy holds, it’s helpful to describe the way the economy
produces things in network terms. Economic activity in the modern
economy is highly specialized. The production network reflects the division
of labor in producing goods and services. The nodes are companies that
provide those goods and services, and the links are the transactions among
companies or between companies and households; households can be
thought of as a special kind of industry that consumes the products of the
other industries and provides them with labor. Although we often take it for
granted, the production network forms the backbone of the economy. It is
the delocalized engine that creates the goods and services that populate and
flow through the network of balance sheets.
To see how the production network functions, let’s examine how it
produces a laptop. A schematic view of the supply chain of a laptop is
shown in Figure 2. Many different specialized products are needed to
manufacture a laptop. The nodes in the network are these products and the
links connect each product to its constituents.
Figure 2. Supply chain of a laptop. The nodes correspond to products, which are shown as circles.
These are connected by links that show which products are inputs to other products.

To produce a laptop, raw materials are extracted from every continent
except Antarctica, transported to other locations and processed to make
composite materials. These in turn are used to make the individual parts that
are then combined and assembled elsewhere to create the laptop. The
process involves many firms in different industries. Each industry makes its
product and sells it to another industry further downstream. The final
product, the laptop, is both a consumer good and an intermediate item used
to make other products: Engineers use laptops to design many things,
including new laptops. This is one of many loops in the production network.
Though we often refer to pieces of the production network as supply chains,
this is a bad metaphor: The production network is full of branches and is
more like a tangled web than a chain.
The physical inputs for laptop production are only part of the story. A
laptop is designed by engineers, who work for companies that get started by
raising capital, which comes from investors, including bankers and other
financiers. Once it’s made, a laptop must be transported, distributed and
marketed. The engineers, fabrication facilities and computer stores are all
housed in buildings, so we must include the construction industry among
the inputs. The buildings sit on land, so we must include real-estate
companies. Manufacturing requires energy, so we have to include that, too,
not to mention the janitors, cooks in the company cafeterias, accountants
and lawyers, the occasional plumber to unclog a toilet – the list is long.
Every industry is connected to many other industries, and the connections
loop back on themselves: Accountants, real-estate agents and engineers all
use laptops to do their jobs.
The making of a laptop illustrates how the economy operates like a big
metabolism. The production network has a structure similar to the proto-life
model described earlier. Their definitions are the same except for a change
in noun phrases:
A metabolism is a network of chemical reactions that transforms a food set of chemical
inputs into other chemicals that provide energy and raw materials for living cells.
A production network is a network of firms that transforms natural resources and labor
into goods and services for consumers.
The economy coordinates the labor of billions of people, so that each
network component is available when and where it is needed.

There is an essential difference between production networks and biological
metabolisms: In biology, metabolisms are localized within each organism
and ecologies are built from the interactions between organisms. But the
economy is structured as if it were one big superorganism, with a single
metabolism. The metabolism of this superorganism operates through the
actions of an ecology of specialists, each of whom the metabolism supports.
This remarkable circular process thrives on the specialization of its goods
and services and the specialization of the labor required to produce them.
An early pioneer of complexity economics
By 1925, post-revolutionary Russia was becoming increasingly dangerous
for Wassily Wassilyevich Leontief. A man from a wealthy family, he’d
already been arrested several times by the Cheka secret-police because of
his campaigning in support of academic autonomy and freedom of speech.
With the net closing ever tighter, he feigned an untreatable terminal illness
that led the authorities to take pity on him and allow him to spend his final
months in the West. Having escaped the Soviet Union, he eventually made
his way to Harvard where he carried out groundbreaking work on
production networks.
Leontif took seriously Adam Smith’s observation that specialization is an
essential feature of an economy and made a mathematical model for how
individual industries in specialized roles interact to create economic
output.11 He was one of the first economists to embrace the digital age: In
1949 he used an early computer, the Harvard Mark II, to solve a system of
linear input-output equations that divided the economy into 500 industries.
This was quite a feat at the time. (Since then, the field has in a sense gone
backwards – typical models now only use between 40 and 100 industries.)
His systems of equations were effectively network models of the economy.
Though no one used the term while he was alive, and he was part of the
mainstream, I consider Leontief a pioneer of complexity economics.
The nodes of Leontief’s production network are industries, comprising
different firms that make a family of products (like automobiles) that can be
lumped together and treated as if they were a single product. The products
can be physical goods (like screws) or services (like pizza delivery). Each
industry buys products from other industries, converts them to make a new
product, and sells them, in turn, to households or other industries. The links

between the nodes are the inputs required to produce each product. Money
flows in the opposite direction to products: Physical goods flow from
suppliers to customers; customers pay their suppliers.12
Leontief’s model assumes that each product is produced via a ‘recipe’
(called a production function in economics) that specifies how much of
each input is needed to make the output. This can be measured in monetary
terms as the value of the products that companies buy and sell. Leontief’s
original model makes some strong assumptions, such as setting markups
(the difference between revenues and costs) to zero and assuming that the
economy exists in a steady-state equilibrium. Neither of these assumptions
is true, but they provide a crude approximation that makes it possible to
solve the resulting equations for the prices of all the products. These
equations closely resemble those that Rick and I used (and that biochemists
use) to understand metabolisms.
Given his status as a defector, it is ironic that the Soviets were perhaps
the biggest beneficiaries of Leontief’s equations, which they used to make
the pieces of a planned economy fit together. Leontief’s equations solve the
chicken-and-egg problem caused by the many positive-feedback loops in
the production network. For example, the Soviets desperately wanted to
increase steel production. To do this, they had to build up the industries that
provide inputs to the steel industry, such as iron, coal and railways. But
building railways requires steel, as do the machines for extracting iron and
coal. Thus, to increase steel production, you need to increase steel
production. Leontief’s methods helped solve this conundrum and allowed
the Soviet planners to invest in each industry so as to increase production as
quickly as possible.13
In economics, models of the production network with multiple industrial
sectors are usually called input-output models. The mainstream interest in
input-output models has ebbed and flowed over the last seventy years. For
two decades following Leontief’s pioneering work, there was a major effort
to predict the behavior of the economy using input-output models with
hundreds of industrial sectors. This was not very successful, and, as we will
discuss in Chapter 5, in the 1970s macroeconomics took off in a very
different direction. Detailed models of the production network were
abandoned, and by the turn of the millennium they had become a footnote
in macroeconomics textbooks.

Meanwhile, in the 1990s, my colleague H. Eugene Stanley from Boston
University and some other physicists started a new movement they called
econophysics, promoting a physics-style approach to understanding the
financial system and the economy. One of the early econophysics papers
from Gene’s group pointed out that the year-to-year fluctuations in the
growth of large companies behave in a very peculiar manner.14 The ‘law of
large numbers’ suggests that fluctuations in output should average out when
we consider the economy as a whole, but this is not what happens – the
fluctuations are much larger than one would normally expect. The French-
American economist Xavier Gabaix postulated that this is due to the
extreme variation in the size of companies, and he used input-output models
to develop his theory.15 Gabaix’s work led to a rekindling of interest in
inputoutput models, which have now branched out in other directions.
Static models of production networks are one of the branches of
economics where mainstream economics and complexity economics
overlap. The model I am about to describe has much in common with
models that are currently popular in the mainstream. Nonetheless, because
my colleagues and I started in a different place, taking our inspiration from
ecology, we came at the problem in a different way and found ways to
apply Leontief’s model that mainstream economists missed.
The ecology of production networks
The second graduate student who played an important role in my work on
production networks is James McNerney. James, a physics student, wanted
to work on something relating to economics and was particularly interested
in the economics of climate change. He came from Boston University to the
Santa Fe Institute in 2008 and spent several years there working with me.
Ecology was always well represented at SFI, and this led James and me to
think about whether we could apply concepts from ecology to economic
production networks.
We were particularly interested in how technological improvement in
one product might cascade through the production network and result in
technological improvements in other products. James extended Leontief’s
equations by adding a simple model for technological progress, assuming
that the net result of progress is that the same output is made with less of
each input. The links in the production network remain the same, but their

weight decreases in response to each industry’s progress, and as inputs go
down, so do product prices.16 (In reality technological progress has many
other effects, but it is often useful to start simple.)
Our idea was based on the ecological concept of a food chain. Imagine a
simplified ecology consisting of lions, zebras and grass, and assign each
species a trophic level – a numerical rating based on their place in the food
chain. Since grass gets its energy directly from the Sun and the atmosphere,
it is usually assigned a trophic level of 1. Zebras eat grass, so they get a
trophic level of 2. Lions eat zebras, so they get a trophic level of 3.
The real world is more complicated. Organisms like humans and pigs are
omnivorous, eating at multiple levels in the food chain, and decomposers
(like worms eating a lion’s corpse) create loops. In reality, the food chain is
actually a food network. Nonetheless, it’s possible to assign trophic levels,
even in such messy situations, through a set of equations stating that the
trophic level of each species in an ecology is one more than the weighted
average of the trophic levels of the things it eats. The resulting trophic
levels are no longer whole numbers, but they’re still helpful in
understanding how a disturbance – for example, the removal of a top
predator by overfishing – affects other species.
We saw that we could compute trophic levels for industries in the same
way. The production network is analogous to a food web. In a food web, the
nodes are species and the links correspond to what they eat; in the
production network, the nodes are industries and the links correspond to
their inputs. While households can be viewed as an ‘industry’, they play a
special role – they are the end-users of the economy.17 James and I made
households the reference point (like the Sun in a food web) and assigned
them a trophic level of zero.
In economics, the trophic level of an industry can be thought of as the
depth of its supply chain. It measures the number of steps required to make
an industry’s product.18 An industry whose only input is labor has a trophic
level of 1, because its only input comes from households, which by
definition have a trophic level of zero. An industry with inputs from
industries other than labor automatically has a trophic level greater than 1.
An industry has a high trophic level if the fraction of its inputs from labor
are small and if its other inputs have high trophic levels. Service industries
tend to have low trophic levels and manufacturing industries tend to have
high trophic levels. (Note that the trophic level is essentially the same as

what is called an output multiplier in economics, though we used the
concept here differently than in earlier work.19)
Figure 3. Comparison of the trophic structure of the US and Chinese economies. The industries are
arranged horizontally based on industry type. The vertical axis shows the trophic level for each

industry. The size of the circles (nodes) corresponds to the revenues of each industry. The arrows
(links) correspond to the largest inputs for each industry.
Figure 3 compares the production networks for the United States and
Chinese economies. The trophic level of each industry is plotted along the
vertical axis, while the horizontal axis places industries according to a
standard industrial classification scheme. Plotting the data this way makes
some key differences between the two economies obvious at a glance.
One of the most striking differences evident in Figure 3 is that on
average the trophic levels of Chinese industries are higher than those of US
industries. There are two reasons for this. One is that the Chinese economy
is much more heavily concentrated in manufacturing industries. In China,
manufacturing industries such as Electrical Equipment or Metallurgy play a
big role in the economy; they tend to have high trophic levels because there
are many steps in their production. In contrast, the United States
concentrates heavily on industries with shallow supply chains such as
Miscellaneous Services or Health.
The second reason trophic levels of Chinese industries are higher is that
they pay their workers lower wages. Since labor is a smaller fraction of the
cost of the inputs, the contribution of the household sector is lower. This
means that the relative amount paid for manufactured inputs is higher,
which raises the trophic level of industries in China.
It is also interesting to compare specific industries: American agriculture,
for example, has a high trophic level, reflecting a high degree of
mechanization. The US industry with the highest trophic level is Food,
because Agriculture, by far its biggest input, already has a high trophic
level. In China, Agriculture is highly labor intensive, giving it a lower
trophic level, like that of service industries.
But what does trophic level have to do with technological innovation and
economic growth? Economic growth depends on technological innovation.
What James realized is that, since innovations are passed along the supply
chain, products made by industries with high trophic levels will tend to
improve faster than products made by industries with low trophic levels.
Think about laptops: The cost of making a laptop depends on the whole
industrial ecosystem that supports it from below. If the tantalum-mining
industry becomes more efficient, this will drive the cost of tantalum down,
so memorychip manufacturers pay less for tantalum, which lowers the cost
of memory chips. If the manufacturers improve the chip-manufacturing

process, this lowers costs even more, and so on, all the way up the supply
chain. We showed that this causes an amplification effect: Improvements
combine multiplicatively as one moves up the supply chain. In contrast, for
a service-intensive industry whose only input is labor, there are no
improvements passed on from the rest of the economy. Any improvements
must come from that industry itself – the only way to innovate is to use
labor more efficiently.
The typical industry improves more due to the effort of its suppliers than
it does due to its own effort. James showed that 65 per cent of
improvements in a given industry come from other industries – or,
alternatively, only 35 per cent of the improvements in a typical industry
come from within the industry itself. Thus, if all industries innovate at the
same rate, and if all else is equal, industries with a higher trophic level will
improve faster than industries with a lower trophic level. This is because an
industry with a deeper supply chain has more industries below it to provide
it with innovations.
We tested our hypothesis on data for thirty-five industries in forty
countries from 1995 to 2009. This database computed a price index for the
products made by each industry in a given country, which gave us an
overall measure of improvement based on lower prices to buy the same
thing, adjusted for changes in quality. For example, if laptops get faster and
have more memory but sell for the same price, the price index will drop, to
account for the improved quality. When the price index drops, this means
that the product has either become cheaper, or better, or some combination
of the two, but in any case it signifies the overall level of improvement.
We tested our hypothesis by forecasting changes in the price index,
taking advantage of the fact that trophic levels change very slowly – so
slowly that they can be treated as constant over the fourteen years between
1995 and 2009. We showed that the trophic level of a given industry in a
given country in 1995 predicts how much its products will have improved
fourteen years later. Since there are other factors influencing improvement,
the individual predictions are by no means perfect, but they worked
extremely well: The average improvement for a given industry in a given
country increases proportional to trophic level, as we predicted, and our
hypothesis is strongly confirmed with extraordinarily high levels of
statistical significance. This helps explain some well-established economic
facts, such as why manufacturing industries tend to improve faster than

service industries, as originally noted by NYU economist William
Baumol.20
Trophic levels also predict the growth rates of countries. Let’s call the
average trophic level of the industries of a given country the trophic level of
that country. According to our model, the growth in GDP of a country
should be proportional to its trophic level. (As before, it is necessary to add
‘if all else is equal’, because there are many other factors that influence
GDP growth.) When we tested our hypothesis at the country level on the
same data set, countries with higher trophic levels in 1995 tended to have
higher GDP growth over the next fourteen years, just as predicted. From
1995 to 2009, US GDP grew by about 1.5 per cent annually, while Chinese
GDP grew by 8.7 per cent annually. How much of this difference can be
explained by trophic level? According to our model, about 30 per cent of
China’s growth advantage over the US between 1995 and 2009 is due to its
higher trophic level in the global economy, and the rest is explained by
other factors.21
Thinking in terms of trophic levels leads to an interesting hypothesis
about development paths. Although trophic levels change slowly, over
many decades, they change in economically important ways. In his PhD
thesis, one of my other students, Charles Savoie, estimated how the trophic
level of the US economy had changed over time from 1790 to the present.22
Bearing in mind that data from earlier years is limited and unreliable, the
story goes like this: In 1790, the trophic level of the US economy was about
3.2, with trophic level and per-capita GDP roughly equivalent to that of
present-day Bulgaria. By 1900, the trophic level had increased to about 4 as
the manufacturing sector grew. The trophic level then remained more or less
constant until roughly 1950, while per-capita GDP grew, and then began to
steadily decline to its current value of 2.5, as manufacturing was
increasingly replaced by services.
Will modern-day developing countries on the industrial growth path
evolve in the same way? China’s current per-capita GDP is a bit lower and
its trophic level a bit higher than those of the United States in 1900. At
present, China’s high trophic level helps the Chinese economy grow
rapidly, but if it follows in our footsteps, GDP will eventually grow more
slowly as the country’s trophic level drops due to higher wages and the
replacement of manufacturing by services.

One of the most striking aspects of our predictions is that they don’t
depend on human behavior, at least directly.23 The trophic level is a
structural property of the economy. Our theory assumes the structure of the
network is given. Because our predictions are independent of any
assumptions about decision-making, they are robust.24 In contrast, standard
models require an assumption that firms maximize their utility, which must
take a particular mathematical form, and assume a particular mathematical
formula for the production function.25
Adam Smith argued that specialization makes the economy work better.
Our work here shows that specialization also boosts the rate of innovation
in the economy. This happens automatically: Each industry in the
production network can count on the rest of the economy to improve its
inputs and provide it with new technologies that will allow improvements in
its own processes. Improvements in an industry with a higher trophic level
automatically happen faster, even if innovations in that industry happen at
the same rate as in other industries.
Our extension of Leontief’s model assumes that the rate of improvement
for each technology is constant in time, so the result is, like his, a static
model. In the next chapter, we’ll discuss the development of a dynamic,
agent-based model, using principles very different from those that govern
equilibrium-based models. (An example was already given in the Prologue.)
The evolution of the ecology of work
In 2012, I was invited by Eric Beinhocker to come to the University of
Oxford. Eric had been a regular visitor at the Santa Fe Institute, and his
2007 book, The Origin of Wealth, described the problems of mainstream
economics and included a discussion of work by me and others in
complexity economics.26 He had received a grant from George Soros to start
a research group that would take a new approach to economics, and he
wanted me to join him and lead a program on complexity economics. My
original appointment was as Director of Complexity Economics at the
Institute for New Economic Thinking at the Oxford Martin School, which is
a cross-disciplinary organization devoted to funding science to help solve
the big problems of society. But it’s not an academic department, and before
I could be appointed I had to become attached to a university department.
Somehow, I ended up in Oxford’s mathematics department, even though

I’ve never published anything in the field of mathematics, but I have since
moved to the Smith School for Enterprise and the Environment, where my
title is the Baillie Gifford Professor of Complex Systems Science. I
eventually got an offer to be a Senior Research Fellow in Christ Church
College, where one of the fun perks is wearing a black gown and sitting at
‘high table’ in the dining hall that the Harry Potter movies used as a
template. Oxford is a long way from Santa Fe, in many respects.
Because my position at the Oxford Martin School is supported with
outside funding, I don’t have teaching responsibilities, which gives me
more time for research. However, I do advise graduate students, which suits
me perfectly. Oxford attracts excellent students from all over the world; I
enjoy collaborating with them, and my productivity has soared as a result.
Since my arrival, I have been steadily building up my group, and I now
have about fifteen graduate students from a variety of disciplines. Most of
them approached me because they wanted to do economics but weren’t
happy with the approach of traditional economics departments.
The work that two of my best students, Penny Mealy and Maria del Rio-
Chanona, have done on understanding labor transitions provides a good
example of complexity economics. Penny, who now works at the World
Bank, was my graduate student and postdoc at Oxford, where she was
based in the geography department. Maria originally studied physics at
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico, but moved to mathematics
when she came to Oxford to do her graduate work with me.
In the coming decades, we will experience two major economic
transitions – automation (including artificial intelligence) and the green-
energy transition – which are unfolding in parallel. In addition to changing
the way we produce things, they are also causing seismic shifts in the
workplace that will dramatically alter the occupational landscape and
determine the future of work for the next generation. We have developed
economic models to help navigate these transitions.
Consider the dilemma faced by coal miners. As coal mines close, miners
need to find new jobs. You might think the simple solution would be to train
them to operate solar farms, but the best sites for solar farms are usually far
from coal mines, and the required job skills are different, so this seemingly
easy solution doesn’t make sense. Instead, data on labor transitions tells us
that coal miners are more likely to become construction-equipment
operators or truck drivers, and workers for solar farms are more likely to

come from power plants or structural iron and steel mills. As these
transitions happen, they alter the supply and demand for labor in each
profession, causing changes that propagate through the workforce. Because
everything depends on everything else, nothing can be understood in
isolation. To understand how the occupational-labor network will evolve
with automation and the green-energy transition, we need a more holistic
view.
We have built an agent-based model that tracks the supply and demand
for labor within individual occupations, showing how the labor ecosystem
adapts to changes in the economy. The model helps answer questions such
as, ‘Which occupations will be most affected?’ or ‘How much
unemployment will this cause?’ or ‘What kind of workforce training would
be most effective?’ It also suggests how the lack of skilled labor for
particular industries might affect production. For example, to minimize
climate change, we need to make the green-energy transition as fast as
possible. Can the workforce adapt quickly enough without slowing down
the greenenergy transition? Penny managed an initial effort to get the lay of
the land, and Maria headed the model’s development.
We began by taking snapshots in time, constructing a static network in
which the nodes were occupations and the links were relationships between
them. The links were based on the similarity of work activities – designing,
say, or recruiting and hiring. This network, which we call the job space, is
shown in Figure 4.27 The nodes are arranged so that occupations that share
many work activities are close together. The similarity of work activities
predicts the likelihood of job transitions between occupations better than
methods previously proposed.

Figure 4. A network view of the job space for the United States in 2016. Nodes (circles) are
occupations, and links are for changes of occupations that occur frequently. Black indicates an
occupation with high unemployment, white indicates low unemployment, with shades of grey in
between. The labels indicate broad occupational categories.
In Figure 4, the nodes in the job space are shaded based on the average
unemployment associated with each occupation. This makes some patterns
self-evident: For example, occupations in the technology or health care
parts of the space have low unemployment rates, while jobs in the
construction and mining part of the space have high unemployment rates.
The diversity is striking: The unemployment rate for nurses is 0.1 per cent;
for boilermakers it’s 25 per cent. The clustering of unemployment in the job

space occurs because occupations that are close to each other share work
activities, which means the supply and demand for their labor tend to be
similar.
Static network plots provide a useful snapshot at any given point in time,
but we wanted to be able to predict how the landscape would change. To do
this, Maria built an agent-based model for the labor market.28 It simulates
all the steps that workers take when they look for jobs. We start with a static
network, but the model is dynamic: As before, each node represents an
occupation, but the model also includes information attached to each node
that describes the state of each occupation – number of workers, job
vacancies – and calculates what happens month by month as workers are
fired and new job vacancies are created based on that occupation’s current
labor demand. Links are based on the frequency with which workers have
changed occupations in the past.29 Workers apply for new jobs both in their
current occupation and in other occupations. The relative rate that they
apply for jobs in new occupations is based on data from the US census. To
keep things simple, we assume that all workers applying for a position are
equally likely to be hired. Workers in occupations with little competition
find new employment quickly, but, if competition is stronger, finding a new
job may take many months or even years. Whenever there are changes in
labor demand in our model, the effects ripple through the job space, as each
occupation affects its neighbors. The beauty of the dynamic model is that it
allows us to keep track of interactions among occupations across the entire
job space and understand how everything affects everything else.
To study how automation will affect occupations in the job space, we
used predictions by our Oxford colleagues Carl Frey and Mike Osborne on
the types of jobs that computerization will eliminate.30 It’s important to keep
in mind that, historically, automation has not resulted in higher
unemployment; instead, it has shifted employment from one occupation to
another. For simplicity, we assumed that the Frey and Osborne predictions
changed the relative demand for occupational labor without affecting the
total demand for labor. We took their predictions as given and then studied
how workers migrate across the job space as old jobs are eliminated and
new jobs are created.
The simulations of the occupational-mobility model indicate that the
transition will be far from uniform: There are regions of the network where
workers easily find new jobs and others where jobless workers get trapped

because there are no suitable alternatives, causing a substantial and
persistent boost to average unemployment. In the model, average
unemployment rises from about 5.3 per cent before the automation shock to
6.7 per cent at the peak of the transition. We compared our results to those
based on a hypothetical ‘complete network’, which assumes workers can
freely transition from any occupation to any other. In the hypothetical
complete network, the unemployment bump is much smaller than our more
realistic model predicts, starting at 4.1 per cent before the shock and
peaking at only 4.7 per cent. This difference in predicted unemployment
rates makes it clear that limits on occupational mobility in the real world
amplify overall unemployment and help determine how long shifts in
unemployment will last during a transition.
Our occupational-transition model predicts some counterintuitive effects.
Dispatchers (like people who coordinate taxis31) and pharmacy aides both
face the same high (72 per cent) probability of automation in their jobs, but
the shifts in their long-term unemployment rates are quite different. The
automation shock causes a 19 per cent increase in the long-term
unemployment for dispatchers, while the pharmacy aides’ long-term
unemployment decreases by roughly the same ratio. This is because, after
the transition, there is more competition with workers from other
occupations seeking jobs as dispatchers than for pharmacy aides
(presumably because dispatchers require less training). The influx of new
workers from other professions seeking jobs makes the job market for
dispatchers more competitive. Similarly, even though child-care workers
are directly unaffected by automation, their long-term unemployment
increases by 6 per cent, because workers from many occupations
undergoing automation can easily become child-care workers. These effects
make sense once you think about them, but to get their magnitudes right
requires a model like ours that takes all occupations into account at once.


Figure 5. The Beveridge curve shows the movements of the job-vacancy rate against the
unemployment rate at different times. The top panel shows the Beveridge curve for the US from
January 2000 to September 2018. The bottom panel superimposes the observed Beveridge curve with
that predicted by our model.
We also got an unexpected bonus: Even though we didn’t build it to do
this, our model provides a quantitative explanation for an important
economic phenomenon called the Beveridge curve, which describes one of
the ways in which it’s easier to fall into a recession than to recover from it.
The Beveridge curve plots the jobvacancy rate against the unemployment
rate. As we enter a recession, job vacancies go down and unemployment
goes up, and when we recover from a recession, the opposite happens.
However, there’s a difference between the trip down and the trip up: At the
same level of vacancies, the unemployment rate as we enter a recession is
lower than it is as we recover from the recession. For example, as the US
economy collapsed in December 2007, the vacancy rate was about 3 per
cent and the unemployment rate was about 5 per cent. The vacancy rate
kept falling, dropping below 2 per cent. When the vacancy rate began to
rise again in the recovery phase, increasing to the 3 per cent level by March
2014, the unemployment rate remained at 6.7 per cent. Because of this
difference, the path when we fall into a recession is different than the
recovery path, and a plot of vacancies vs unemployment for the 2008
recession looks a bit like a teardrop, as shown in Figure 5.
The Beveridge curve is a good example of an emergent phenomenon:
We didn’t build the model to understand it, so we were pleasantly surprised
when we discovered that our model could explain it. In fact, Figure 5 shows
that the Beveridge curve that our model makes when we simulate the
business cycle for the 2008 financial crisis has a similar size and shape, and
the same direction of movement, as the real thing. This is encouraging
because a good model should explain as many different phenomena as
possible. In sharp contrast to the mainstream work on this subject, which
assumes the Beveridge curve is an equilibrium phenomenon, our model
predicts that it is a disequilibrium phenomenon – that is, a transient
response to changing conditions in the economy. According to our model,
more sudden recessions should cause ‘fatter’ Beveridge curves or, in other
words, a bigger gap between the path up and the path down. We are in the
process of testing our predictions empirically by looking at past recessions.

In contrast to standard theories, our model predicts that the area inside the
Beveridge curve is proportional to the suddenness of the recession.
There are also practical policy applications. To recover from a recession
quickly, one would like to make the Beveridge curve as ‘thin’ as possible:
For a given level of job vacancies, one would like to make unemployment
on the trip up (the recovery) as close as possible to where it was on the trip
down. Our model provides insight into how to accomplish this. For
example, if we artificially make it easier to move between occupations, the
Beveridge curve gets thinner.
Our occupational-transition model is a work in progress, and we are just
beginning to explore all the things it can do, but we believe it will
ultimately allow a more quantitative understanding of the dynamics of
occupational unemployment. At a policy level, it could increase the
effectiveness of job-retraining efforts by targeting the right occupations and
reducing the problems created by shifting demand for labor across different
occupations in response to factors like automation. We are designing a new
version of this model using detailed microdata from Brazil to calibrate it
more precisely. To study the green-energy transition, which is happening in
parallel with automation, we are also developing a model for how the
production network will shift as we move from fossil fuels to renewables.
We are then using the production-network model discussed earlier in
tandem with the occupational-transition model to predict how the job
landscape will be altered by the transition and whether bottlenecks are
likely to develop that might slow the green-energy transition down. We are
also incorporating geographical, as well as occupational, mobility. This will
allow us to anticipate such bottlenecks, so that policymakers can plan ahead
and focus retraining efforts on the occupations that will be most needed to
keep the green-energy transition on track.
...
