4.
How Simulations Help us Understand the
Economy
For most problems found in mathematics textbooks, mathematical
reasoning is quite useful. But how often do people find textbook problems in
real life?
Lynn Steen1
What is a simulation?
Computers allow us to mimic just about anything. Boeing creates a full-
blown virtual-reality simulacrum of every plane it designs. Pilots fly
simulated planes whose controls and responses look and feel much like
those of a real plane, and virtual flight attendants walk down the aisles and
serve drinks to simulated passengers to make sure the seats and trays are
well placed. Although there are still limits to their capabilities, computer
simulations now enable us to create digital twins of countless real-world
systems, and they play an important role in almost every branch of science,
including the social sciences – except for mainstream economics!
A simulation is often preceded by building a network model. You can
think of the network as the skeleton, and the simulation as the living tissue
filling out the skeleton and enabling the body to function. A simulation goes
beyond a network model by capturing the dynamics: How do the nodes and
links, and their properties, change over time? Simulation is a bottom-up
approach, acting at the level of the individual building blocks, letting the
collective behavior of the system emerge. By definition, emergent behavior
is bottom-up, and simulation is often the only method for understanding it.
Simulation in the social sciences is more challenging than it is in the
physical sciences. Atoms don’t think or make choices, while stars obey the

laws of gravity, which are precise, inviolable and well understood. But there
are no laws that can reliably tell us how people will behave in any possible
situation. People have agency; they make decisions, which are much more
difficult to predict than physical processes. There is now a huge body of
work in psychology and sociology that helps us understand how people
behave; nonetheless, our models for human behavior are still imprecise and
controversial, and, most important, they don’t cover all aspects of economic
decision-making.
Agent-based models have been very successful for problems where
decision-making is reasonably simple. A good example is traffic modeling,
in which drivers are the agents.2 In a traffic simulation, each simulated
driver interacts with simulated drivers in nearby cars, speeding up and
slowing down as needed. Traffic jams are a simple example of an emergent
phenomenon: As soon as one driver slows down on a crowded road, those
behind must slow down too. Cars begin to pile up, which causes even more
slowing down, until the traffic comes to a near-halt. Agent-based models do
a good job of predicting the conditions that can lead to traffic jams, and
they help city planners design transportation systems. Some cities, such as
Portland, Oregon, have built hyper-realistic simulations, with a one-to-one
representation of every road, building and almost every car, and there are
now several competing companies that provide traffic simulation for hire.3
These simulations accurately predict travel times under different conditions,
allowing planners to ask ‘what-if’ questions and experiment with adding or
closing lanes or building bridges to see how such changes would affect
traffic. One of the reasons traffic modeling works well is that the decision-
making isn’t very complicated and is easily captured by simple rules of
thumb, involving factors like the typical minimum spacing between cars
and the typical reaction time for braking.
Agent-based models have also become essential tools in epidemiology.
Epidemic simulations track the movements and interactions of individual
people, who can be healthy, infected or immune. Such models can
incorporate transportation routes and flight schedules connecting cities and
the locations of hospitals and schools. Simulations can investigate ‘what-if’
scenarios and, in some cases, they have accurately forecast the likely effect
of vaccination protocols or other public-health measures, helping to achieve
the best possible outcomes with the least effort.

The COVID pandemic presented a challenge to epidemic simulations for
two reasons. At the onset, there was a great deal of uncertainty about how
the virus was transmitted and whether or not it could be transmitted by
people who were asymptomatic. Disease propagation depends crucially on
these parameters, which threw off the predictions of the models in the early
stages of the pandemic. As data poured in, these parameters became more
certain, but another problem appeared: People began to change their
behavior. In some places, people were careful about wearing masks and
following social-distancing protocols, and in other places they weren’t. As
time wore on, in some places there was a backlash against masks and
vaccinations, sometimes fueled by politics – circumstances difficult to
predict in advance. Despite these problems, the best models provided useful
predictions that helped policymakers make better decisions.4
Simulation models are never perfect, but they can be good enough to be
useful.5 We’ll discuss the controversies about models based on human
behavior in Chapters 5 and 6. But, before we delve into that, we need to
understand an essential advantage of agent-based models, which is the
graceful and effortless way they incorporate nonlinearity.
Nonlinearity, emergence and the need for simulation
Nonlinearity is a necessary condition for emergence; without nonlinearity,
there would be no emergence and thus no such thing as a complex system.
Nonlinearity underpins almost all the big, interesting open questions – such
as the origins of intelligence, consciousness and life – as well as the recent
huge advances in machine learning. It also plays important roles in the
economy – roles that have yet to be properly explored and can be fully
understood only through simulation.
By definition, a system is nonlinear if the whole is different from the
sum of its parts. In contrast, a system is linear if the whole is equal to the
sum of its parts. Nonlinearity is the norm in the real world and economics is
no exception. For example, as already mentioned, production functions
describe how much a firm or industry can produce with a given set of
inputs. A production function is like a basic recipe with a list of possible
variations. In some cases a single input may be absolutely essential, or in
other cases substitutions may be allowed. The amount that is produced is
not simply the sum of the inputs, but rather depends on the inputs in a more

complicated way, which means that the formula relating the inputs to the
outputs is a nonlinear function.6 In Chapter 7 we’ll see how the
nonlinearities of the production function can give rise to oscillations in the
economy that look like business cycles, and in Chapter 11 we’ll see how the
nonlinear behavior of loan repayment can cause the financial system to
crash.
It is often tempting to avoid nonlinearities because they complicate
mathematical analysis. Economists greatly prefer equations with what are
called closed-form solutions – that is, formulas that can be used to simply
plug in numbers and get the answer. All scientists like closed-form
solutions, because they’re convenient and easy to understand. But the quest
for closed-form solutions often distracts economists from solving the most
important problems. Economists love mathematics and eschew simulations.
Our understanding of economics has suffered as a result.
Before the advent of the computer, the mathematical arsenal for
scientists was limited to what they could solve with pencil and paper. This
put an enormous premium on finding closed-form solutions. Because linear
equations always have closed-form solutions and nonlinear equations rarely
do, expedience dictated that almost all models in science were based on
linear mathematics. The world of nonlinear mathematics remained largely
unexplored.
When I was a graduate student at UC Santa Cruz, in 1975, I was inspired
by a lecture by Stan Ulam, one of the greatest twentieth-century
mathematicians.7 He began by apologizing for the title of his lecture, which
was ‘Nonlinear Mathematics’. Since almost everything is nonlinear, he said,
calling mathematics nonlinear was like referring to ‘nonelephant’ animals.
To illustrate his point, Ulam told a standard joke about a mathematician
who is found searching for something under a lamppost. A passerby asks,
‘What did you lose?’ and he replies, ‘My keys.’ Trying to be helpful, the
passerby responds, ‘Can I help you look for them?’ The embarrassed
mathematician responds, ‘Well, actually, I didn’t drop them here, I dropped
them over there in the dark somewhere. But at least I can see here.’
Until digital computers arrived, most of science suffered because we
couldn’t solve most of the equations we needed to solve to understand the
world. All we could do was look under lampposts. The linear ground under
the lampposts got thoroughly explored, while the nonlinear areas outside
the circle of available light were neglected. Ulam was one of the earliest

mathematicians to use computers to explore nonlinear mathematics, and
one of the first to demonstrate emergent behavior in complex systems.8
The fact that almost all equations are nonlinear doesn’t mean that almost
all equations lead to emergent phenomena. The presence of nonlinearity per
se doesn’t imply emergent behavior. In fact, usually it doesn’t. Complex
systems are special. We cannot say in advance whether or not a set of
nonlinear equations will give rise to emergent phenomena; this almost
always requires simulating them on a computer. Restated in logical terms,
nonlinearity is necessary but not sufficient for emergent behavior. In a
world where almost everything is nonlinear, computer simulations are an
essential tool for science. Simulation via agent-based modeling provides us
with a laboratory to explore the economic world – to boldly go where no
one has gone before, and to study the world ‘as is’ rather than ‘as if’ it were
something else.
When macroeconomists are confronted by nonlinear equations, because
they are hard to work with, they often simplify them to make them linear.
But because nonlinear dynamics is a prerequisite for endogenous dynamics
– that is, motion from within – linearizing the equations makes it impossible
for dynamics to emerge. If you want to understand a business cycle,
linearizing guarantees that the (model) economy won’t move by itself.
Agent-based models liberate us from these kinds of assumptions.
The COVID pandemic, revisited
In the prologue I described the model we built at the beginning of the
COVID pandemic that accurately predicted the hit to the UK economy. As
the pandemic wore on, far longer than we imagined it would, it became
clearer and clearer how the pandemic, the economy and the actions of
governments around the world were intricately interlinked. While we could
do the economics well, to make a proper model we needed to team up with
epidemiologists. (We did not aspire to predict what the governments would
do, only to advise them on what was likely to happen, conditional on their
decisions.) To build a better model we teamed up with a group including
Alessandro Vespignani, from Northeastern University in Boston.
Alessandro is a leading figure in network science and agent-based modeling
of pandemics, and his group made some of the most accurate and
informative predictions during the pandemic.9

In an effort led by Marco Pangallo on our side, and Alberto Aleta from
the epidemic side, we did something new: We built a model that simulated
both the epidemiology and the economics of the pandemic in tandem (see
Figure 6).10 This model was for the New York metropolitan area and gave
predictions for the economic and epidemic impacts on a day-by-day basis.
Both models used a synthetic population of 416,442 individuals grouped
into 153,457 households.11 These numbers were picked to match a database
of volunteers who consented to have their mobile phones tracked (though
their identities were confidential). As shown in the figure, the synthetic
population matched key demographic features of the real population,
including age, income, employment, industry sector of employment,
occupation and ability to work from home. The movements of the tracked
volunteers allowed us to see how much they moved around the city, and
therefore how likely they were to infect or be infected by others, and to
determine whether they went to work. The models were coupled: If
someone becomes unemployed, they cease to go to work and can no longer
get infected in the workplace, whereas if someone who is previously
unemployed becomes employed their danger of infection increases. The
epidemic and economic models send signals to each other every day, which
are incorporated into their forecasts for the following day.

Figure 6. Our model for the epidemic’s effect on sickness and the economy.
Marco took advantage of data on the types of economic activity in each
census tract to build a very fine-grained geographic model of the economics
of the pandemic. This made it possible to predict how the pandemic would
affect the economy geographically, enabling predictions conditional on
poverty, race and age. It allowed us to study different policies to search for
those that were ‘least bad’. We first demonstrated that the model did a good
job of predicting the onset of the pandemic in 2020 (though in this case we

had the benefit of hindsight, so we were really fitting to the data rather than
making a true prediction).
Once we were confident in the model, we investigated a variety of
different ‘what-if’ scenarios. For example, we showed that if the first New
York lockdown had only been imposed a couple of weeks earlier, there
would have been both far fewer deaths and much less economic suffering.
We also showed that the tradeoff between economic suffering and epidemic
deaths is similar whether outcomes change due to fear of infection or non-
pharmaceutical inventions. In either case, low-income workers experience
much higher infections and much worse economic harm.
Our model is innovative because it couples together two agent-based
models, one for economics and one for epidemics, to provide useful policy
analysis. This could be valuable during future pandemics in guiding
policymakers to understand the tradeoff between different sources of harm.
It also provides a proof of principle for how agent-based models from
different disciplines can work together to provide better policy advice.
A housing bubble from the bottom up
Shortly after the 2008 financial crisis, we built an agent-based model of the
Washington DC housing market.12 There are several reasons why housing
markets are an ideal candidate for agent-based modeling. First, as we
learned the hard way in the crisis, housing markets are really important to
the entire economy. Second, the way houses are bought and sold makes
housing markets hard to model using standard theory (more on this in a
moment). In contrast, our agent-based model simply mimics the
institutional structures for buying and selling houses in the real world and
employs rules of thumb that people actually use to make decisions. The
model involves a lot of computer programming and data but the way it
works will be familiar to anyone who has ever bought a house.
Using detailed data on real-estate transactions and mortgages, and
information from the IRS and the US census, our model reproduced all the
steps of buying or selling a house. We simulated the decisions of
households to rent or buy and their interactions with banks and real-estate
agents in taking out loans and buying and selling houses. Although this
might sound like an obvious way to do things, it’s completely different from
any existing mainstream economic model. The result provides useful insight

into what drove the housing bubble that peaked in 2006, and how the next
one can be avoided.
The housing bubble played a major role in the ensuing financial crisis. In
real terms, between 1997 and 2006, US housing prices increased by almost
a factor of 3 and then dropped by 30 per cent over the next four years.13
This had a significant effect on the economy for several reasons.
First, in the United States and many other countries, housing is the
biggest repository of household savings. When housing prices drop,
everyone who owns a house becomes poorer – so people spend less, which
means that companies lower production and unemployment goes up. This
means fewer people buy houses, which lowers housing prices further and
makes people even poorer, creating a vicious cycle. This happens when any
housing bubble bursts.
What made this bubble special, and made the bursting of the bubble
particularly painful, is that banks had heavily invested in a recent financial
innovation called mortgage-backed securities, which are bundles of
mortgages. When the housing bubble burst, the value of mortgage-backed
securities dropped substantially. Because they had been viewed as a safe
investment, the biggest financial institutions throughout the world held lots
of mortgage-backed securities. When their value dropped, this created a
global credit crisis; the financial system abruptly switched from easy credit
to no credit at all. As a result, many businesses couldn’t borrow the money
they needed to operate, increasing unemployment, causing less
consumption and depressing global economic output. Unfortunately, as
noted in the Introduction, when it was consulted about the possible effect of
a decline in housing prices in 2006, the Federal Reserve Bank model vastly
underestimated how this would affect the economy.
But what caused the housing bubble? Possible explanations include
lending practices, high interest rates and demographic shifts. How big a role
did each of these play?
My collaborators and I were empowered to address these questions
through a grant we received in 2010 from the Institute for New Economic
Thinking, which was created with a large donation from George Soros.
(This is the global Institute for New Economic Thinking, not the one at
Oxford, which was founded two years later.) At the time, I was still at the
Santa Fe Institute, where my fellow external-faculty member Rob Axtell
was visiting. Rob is one of the pioneers of agent-based modeling (he was

doing it long before I was), and he ran the Computational Social Science
Program at George Mason University.14 To complete the roster of senior
people on the team for this project, we enlisted the already-mentioned John
Geanakoplos, who is, among other things, an expert on mortgage-backed
securities and housing markets. Finally, we recruited Peter Howitt, then a
professor at Brown and perhaps the only prominent mainstream economist
who does agent-based modeling on the side.
Housing markets are a local phenomenon, so we decided to make our
model on the scale of a typical American city. The housing bubble did not
move in lockstep throughout the United States – there was a huge bubble in
Las Vegas, for example, while the market stayed nearly flat in Dallas.
Washington DC was somewhere in the middle, so it seemed like a good
choice.
Data collection was a major challenge: We gathered extensive data sets
on home prices, lending practices, income, wealth and demographics for the
period 1997–2010, including several data sets specific to Washington. (It
helped that Rob was based in Washington; his personal connections gave us
access to data we would never otherwise have gotten.)
Our goal was to make the most realistic possible simulation of how
houses are bought and sold. This meant modeling details like how people
got loans from banks and how real-estate agents helped them find the right
house. The agents in our model were households, who could be
homeowners or renters. We simulated the behavior of 10,000 households in
small runs and up to 100,000 in larger runs – fewer than the actual number
of households in Washington but enough to provide a good sample. We
created artificial households with different levels of income and wealth, so
that they were representative of the actual households in the Washington
DC area in roughly the right proportions.
The central question that each of our households faced was, ‘Should I
rent or buy?’ Buying might result in a higher monthly payment, but in
contrast to renting, some of it goes to pay off the principal (the amount
borrowed). The decision of whether to rent or buy is strongly influenced by
whether or not you expect prices to rise. If your neighbors own their houses
and you don’t own yours, and housing prices go up, you’ll likely regret not
buying. But if you expect prices to fall, then buying may not be wise. We
built a model of the decision-making of prospective buyers. Each household
estimated future house prices based on the recent trend; if house prices were

currently going up, the households assumed they would keep going up, at
least for a while. The fact that people make house-buying decisions this
way is well supported by the data and is an example of what economists
call backward-looking expectations. At the same time, our households
thought about how future prices would affect them. Thus, our model for
prospective buyers used a mixture of forward- and backward-looking
expectations, based on research supported by data and common sense.
The fact that most people take out a mortgage when they buy a house
raises the stakes. This leverages the investment, amplifying gains or losses.
If you put 20 per cent down and prices go up by 20 per cent, you double
your money, making 100 per cent on your investment, and you’re a happy
camper. But if prices drop by 20 per cent, you lose your entire investment.
The collapse of housing prices in 2007 caught many people by surprise, and
the fact that many of them were strongly leveraged left them in dire straits.
Lending policy affects who has access to credit, something we
hypothesized had a huge effect on house prices. To test this hypothesis, we
simulated the process of taking out a housing loan. When our simulated
households decided to buy a house, unless they were rich enough to buy the
house outright, they went to a simulated bank to ask for a loan. The bank
would consider each loan application, consider the household’s income and
wealth, and accept or reject the application accordingly. The simulated bank
offered several kinds of loans, ranging from simple, old-fashioned fixed-
rate thirty-year mortgages to complicated, newfangled loans with variable
rates and balloon payments. In the build-up to the actual crisis, lending
policy became more liberal: It was easier to get a loan and the terms were
more generous, often with higher leverage and a higher proportion of
complicated loans. We were able to acquire a detailed data set with a record
of almost all mortgages in Washington, so we could adjust our bank
algorithm on a year-by-year basis to match the types of mortgages that were
actually issued. We could also run counterfactual scenarios, for example
holding the types of loans constant. Similarly, the interest rates at which
loans are given could be adjusted to match historical rates, or we could
make up hypothetical interest rates to assess their importance in driving the
bubble.
Demography also plays an important role in determining house prices. If
more people move to a city than move out of it, they will increase demand
and drive prices up. We were able to acquire data based on tax returns that

told us how many people in a given age and income range entered or left
Washington each year.15 In the course of our simulation, for each year, we
could introduce new households (who needed to buy or rent new houses) or
put new houses on the market when they moved away from Washington.
We also knew how many people put their houses up for sale and remained
within Washington.
At the beginning of the simulation, we assigned households diverse
incomes and wealth to match the real data in 1997. Then, for each
household, we simulated subsequent savings and consumption behavior
using the best economic models available.16 Most households’ incomes
tended to slowly increase, but unlucky households could become
unemployed and default on their mortgages.
Standard models in economics assume that supply equals demand. This
is a reasonable approximation for the stock market on timescales of more
than a day, but it is a terrible approximation for housing markets. The
supply of houses available for sale at any point in time can be very far from
the demand, so that at any given moment there can be a substantial
mismatch between the number of houses on the market and the number of
people looking for a house. As a result, housing prices often change
sluggishly in response to changes in supply and demand, and the inventory
of unsold houses varies significantly, based on the state of the housing
market.
This meant we had to be more realistic in the way we set housing prices.
Once again, we closely mimicked the way this actually happens. We were
fortunate to obtain data from the association of real-estate agencies in the
Washington area that recorded all the quoted asking prices for every house
sold through an agency, as well as the final sale price. We analyzed this data
and determined that housing prices are set like this: When a house is put on
the market, the seller looks for recent sales of comparable houses and marks
his or her own house up by a small amount, typically about 5 per cent. Then
if the house doesn’t sell after a month, the seller marks it down by about 10
per cent, and continues marking it down until either the house sells or is
taken off the market. (This will be familiar to anyone who has bought or
sold a house, but remarkably, no other economic models set prices this
way.)
We also modeled the rental market. This meant we had to model
landlords, who buy houses to rent to others. This part of our model was less

accurate, because we couldn’t get good data on rental prices.
We simulated the model on a monthly timescale. We began by
initializing the model to match conditions at the beginning of 1997. Each
month, the model would run through a series of steps like this:
1. Demography is updated, so that new households enter and leave the
area to match the historical record.
2. The banks survey all their existing loans and make foreclosure
decisions.
3. Households are updated. This requires a long list of possible actions
and decisions for each household, including: receive income;
consume; make a rental or mortgage payment; decide whether or not
to buy a new house; decide whether or not to sell, list or delist a house
that is already on the market; apply for a loan or refinance an existing
loan.
4. The banks consider loan applications and offer terms for mortgages.
5. Houses and buyers enter the market, and houses are bought and sold.
Models always have parameters, which are like knobs that need to be
adjusted to specify exactly what the model is. Some of the parameters are
easy to pin down, like a tax rate, which you simply look up. Other
parameters may not be so straightforward to set; we call these free
parameters. Our model had quite a few of them. An example is the number
of years households use for guessing trends in housing prices: Do people
think a rise in house prices last year implies a rise next year? Or do they
consider the last four years? Another parameter determines how much the
household weights the need for housing relative to other forms of
consumption. We could adjust the parameters to closely match the data.
However, this didn’t necessarily show that the model was good – with
enough free parameters, you can fit almost anything to historical data – and
we wanted to be sure we were on solid ground.
To address this problem, we set the parameters for each part of the model
separately, using microdata. For example, we adjusted the parameters for
how the households set their housing budgets by looking at census data
(which recorded how much individual households actually spent), and the
parameters for their strategies for selling houses by looking at real-estate
quotes, and so on. This was a lot of work – even more than constructing the

original model. Then we put all the modules together and pushed Run. We
started the model in 1997 and let it run without any intervention until 2010.
The last value in the simulation was, in a sense, a thirteen-year-ahead
prediction.17 To test the validity of our model, we then compared our
simulation’s prediction to what actually happened in the Washington
housing market during those thirteen years. The results are shown in Figure
7.
The plots shown in Figure 7 consider nine different features of the
housing market. The match is by no means perfect; for example, the
simulated bubble peaks before the real bubble and prices go a little higher.
The model doesn’t fit every feature perfectly, but most of the time it’s in the
ballpark. It is important to look at the scales on the plots – for home
ownership rates, for example, we predicted rates around 60 per cent,
whereas in reality they varied between 65 and 70 per cent. So we weren’t
doing badly given that we were missing the data needed to calibrate some
of the features, such as the rental market.
In addition to trying to match reality, we also did some counterfactual
experiments. When we held interest rates constant at the initial (high) value,
for example, the bubble in our simulation was damped. This was expected;
low interest rates reduce monthly payments and so create more demand for
housing. We also experimented with holding lending policy constant, with
banks continuing to issue the same type of loans they were making in 1997,
which were mostly fixed-rate with down payments of 20 per cent or more.
The result was that the housing bubble almost disappeared, which
confirmed our hypothesis that shifts in lending policy played a bigger role
in causing the housing bubble than other factors, such as interest rates. The
important role of lending policy is understood now, but it was by no means
well established at the time we developed our model.

Figure 7. Housing market simulation for Washington DC. We compare predictions to data for nine
different features of the housing market. Solid lines are model outputs, dashed lines are data. The
Case-Shiller index is an indicator of how much housing prices have changed; ‘1’ indicates not at all,
‘2’ indicates that prices have doubled, etc.17 ‘OLP’ is ‘Original Listing Price’. Note the scale of the
plots; for example, it looks like homeownership rates are substantially wrong, but the difference is
only about 5 percent.
At this point in the project, we ran out of funds and had to quit.
However, this work was continued in a collaboration between my group at
Oxford and the Bank of England. We constructed a simpler model based on
the same principles, making heavy use of what was learned from modeling
the Washington DC market. The Bank of England model was calibrated on
British data and used to study lending policies in the UK.19 Housing prices
in the London area had been climbing for two decades, and in 2016 they
were extremely high and still rising. With a few caveats, our model was
able to reproduce this behavior.
To keep housing prices in the London area from rising even further, the
Bank of England was contemplating restricting lending so that 85 per cent
of bank loans would have a loan-to-income ratio less than 3.5. In other
words, they proposed that, in most cases, to get a loan for £350,000, the
borrower would have to have an annual income of at least £100,000. The
goal was to dampen the bubble (though the Bank of England forbade us

from using the word bubble), but not so strongly that the market crashed.
We tested this policy in our model by simulating a bubble and then
suddenly implementing the proposed policy as prices were climbing. When
we did this, prices stopped climbing but didn’t crash, which was the desired
behavior. Our results were presented to the UK Financial Policy Committee
and shortly thereafter they implemented the policy. (We were not privy to
the committee’s deliberations and don’t know whether our model
influenced their decision.) After the policy was implemented, the bubble
flattened out, essentially as our model predicted it would.
This work shows the potential of large-scale modeling of the housing
market. With today’s computing power, it is possible to simulate markets
with hundreds of millions of houses. There exists detailed data about
housing transactions and mortgages for the entire United States, which
could be used to make a realistic and quantitatively accurate model. Cities
like Washington or London can be modeled at one-to-one scale, including
the characteristics of each house in its geographic location, to understand
how local factors like transportation networks and neighborhoods affect
housing prices.
Models like this are now being pursued by at least seven different central
banks and could help prevent future housing bubbles.20 The Bank of
Hungary, for example, has an agent-based model that maps the Hungarian
housing market at one-to-one scale – each person and each house is
represented. They are using this model to predict how government policy
levers will affect housing prices and formulate policies to reduce defaults
and damp bubbles. Such models are also potentially very helpful to city
planners who want to implement policies for affordable housing.
...
