5.
A Lightning Summary of Standard
Economics
To understand why complexity economics is revolutionary, it needs to be
compared to standard economic theory, which is built on a set of very
different assumptions that developed over the last two centuries. The core
concepts were formed before computers were widely used, and when
empirical data from the social sciences about human behavior was still
scant. To cope with these limitations, economists made bold assumptions.
They took a top-down approach, developing a mathematical theory about
how people make decisions and how this affects the economy. While
economics has evolved substantially over the last fifty years to include such
new developments as behavioral economics, the central ideas remain much
the same. There is not room here to provide a proper exposition of standard
economic theory, but I will present a succinct summary of the main ideas.
Foundational assumptions of standard economic theory
I think of the key assumptions of standard economic theory as three pillars:
utility maximization, equilibrium and agent beliefs. These three ideas are
taught in all economics textbooks and form the basis for all mainstream
theory.
The central pillar is utility maximization. Utility is like a scorecard:
Given a set of choices, utility measures the relative desirability of each one,
so that you can decide which you prefer. Mainstream economists assume
that any choice can be given a utility score and that we choose the best
option. The idea of utility grew out of the mid-nineteenth-century school of
thought called Utilitarianism, which posited that we all seek to be happy, at
least in some sense, and that happiness can be measured.1 The notion of
utility used in contemporary economics has evolved since then. It no longer

represents happiness, but is instead simply a mathematical device for
expressing agents’ preferences. Each agent is assigned a utility function that
represents the relative desirability of her possible choices. Economic
theories are built by assuming that agents make choices that maximize their
expected utility – that is, the utility they will get on average given their
beliefs about the future.
To understand how this works, imagine you’re about to go on a picnic,
and you’re in the supermarket wondering whether to buy a disposable
umbrella or a fancy dessert, which both cost $10. To make a good choice
you need to compare your loss of utility from getting wet against your gain
in utility from eating the fancy dessert. To do this you need to understand
your preferences. You might think, ‘If it rains, I would pay $100 to stay
dry.’ To rephrase this in economics jargon, let’s say your baseline utility for
being dry is 0, your (dis)utility for getting wet is –100, and your utility from
eating the fancy dessert is 10.
To make your decision, for each choice and each possible outcome, you
multiply the utility for the outcome by its probability in order to find the
decision that results in higher utility. There are four possible outcomes:
• You buy the umbrella and it rains. No dessert but you stay dry whether
or not it rains, so you get your baseline utility = 0.
• You buy the umbrella and it doesn’t rain. No dessert and you stay dry,
so this is the same as above: Your utility = 0.
• You buy the dessert and it rains. The yummy dessert gives you a utility
of 10 but you experience a disutility of –100 from getting wet, so
overall your utility = –90.
• You buy the dessert and it doesn’t rain. The yummy desert gives you a
utility of 10 and you stay dry, so your utility = 10.
If you buy the umbrella then your expected utility is zero whether or not it
rains. But your expected utility if you don’t buy the umbrella depends on
how likely you think it is to rain. If you think that there is a 20 per cent
chance of rain then your expected utility is –90 x 0.2 + 10 x (1 – 0.2) = –10.
Zero is larger than –10, so you buy the umbrella and forgo the dessert. (But
if you think the probability of rain is less than 10 per cent you will instead
buy the dessert.)

Standard economic models assume that agents go through calculations
like this to determine their expected utility for each possible decision, and
choose the decisions with the highest utility. In a macroeconomic model an
agent might be a firm, whose utility is based on maximizing profits, or a
household, whose utility is based on maximizing consumption. Utility
maximization is the starting point for virtually every mainstream economic
model. Economists like it because it provides a way to model people’s goals
and infer their decisions.
The second pillar of mainstream economic theory is equilibrium. This
idea’s long history stems from the nineteenth-century French mathematical
economist Léon Walras, who developed a theory for price formation based
on the way stocks used to be traded in the Paris Bourse. In those days an
auctioneer would propose a price for a stock and poll the traders in the
room to see how many shares were offered to buy or sell at that price. If
there was excess demand the auctioneer would raise the price, and if there
was excess supply he would lower it. The auctioneer kept polling the
traders until demand matched the supply, at which point he would stop and
transactions would take place at the final price. By analogy to physics,
Walras called the state where supply matches demand equilibrium. The
concept of equilibrium was independently developed by others, including
the great British economist Alfred Marshall, and is a centerpiece of
economic theory.
Marshall put the first two pillars together by showing how equilibrium
prices and quantities can be derived from utility maximization, building on
earlier work by the British logician William Stanley Jevons. Marshall
assumed that the price an agent is willing to pay for a good (like an
umbrella) is determined by her utility score for that good. He showed how
to use this to compute supply- and-demand curves and find the equilibrium
where supply meets demand, making it possible to compute the price of the
good and the quantity traded. Because of its convenience and power, the
equilibrium assumption soon became standard in economic theory. By the
middle of the twentieth century, economists like Paul Samuelson, Kenneth
Arrow and Robert Solow (and many others) developed Marshall’s approach
and applied it to problems such as international trade, market regulation and
economic growth.
However, something important was still missing. Up until that point,
economic models had assumed a world of perfect certainty. Most models

were either set in the present, where the utility of each choice is known, or
they assumed a deterministic world where the future was perfectly known
by every agent. But in the real world, the future is unknown. How could
economists construct models with agents who make decisions about an
unknown future?
This caused more careful thinking about how agents form their beliefs
about the future. Each agent in an economic model needs a model of their
own to evaluate the likelihood of future events. This allows them to
calculate the expected utility associated with each possible decision by
weighting the utility of each choice according to its likelihood, as we did in
the umbrella example. The modeling of agents’ beliefs about the future,
which is used to assign probabilities to events, constitutes the third pillar.
The umbrella example is simple because there is just one agent. But in
more interesting settings agents need to take other agents into account. A
store selling umbrellas can make higher profits by understanding its
customers: If the patrons of the store think rain is likely, they may be able to
charge more for umbrellas, but if rain is unlikely, they may need to charge
less. To set prices correctly this way, they need to understand how their
customers make decisions. This requires a model for agents’ beliefs that
takes into account agents’ abilities to form models for their own beliefs and
the beliefs of others.
The most widely used model of beliefs is called rational expectations,
and was introduced in 1961 by American economist John Muth.2 Under
rational expectations, agents use the information available to them to make
the best decisions possible based on expectations that are consistent with
their underlying model of the world. This is the most common way
economists make models for agents who need to take each other into
account.
A study of students’ decisions in buying textbooks provides a simple
illustration.3 Publishers like to issue new editions of a textbook frequently,
forcing students to buy the new edition. But students have a choice to buy a
textbook new or used, or not buy it at all. Unsurprisingly, when publishers
issue new editions too frequently, students become reluctant to buy new
textbooks because they might go out of date before they can be resold.
Publishers recognize that students behave this way, and adjust the frequency
of new editions accordingly to maximize their profits. This is a good
example of a case where the hypothesis of rational-expectations equilibrium

succeeds: Students reason about the behavior of publishers and publishers
reason about the behavior of students, and they settle into an equilibrium
where their expectations are consistent with each other.
The evolution of contemporary macroeconomics
The rational-expectations model of decision-making caught on quickly in
microeconomics, the branch of economics that studies how individual
agents make decisions, but macroeconomists were slower to adopt it.
Through the 1960s and into the 1970s, models in macroeconomics were
still based on statistical models of aggregate behavior (econometrics).
Rather than trying to understand causal mechanisms by reasoning from first
principles, econometrics simply looks to past statistical data to construct
models.
The conceptual framework that dominated macroeconomics at the time
was based on the ideas of the English economist John Maynard Keynes,
who emphasized the importance of the feedback loop between
unemployment and production.4 If many people are thrown out of work, he
reasoned, suppliers have fewer consumers. Therefore suppliers have to
decrease production, which means firing more workers, which means
decreasing production even more, and so on. If unemployment increases,
for any reason, the economy can get stuck in an unfavorable self-
reinforcing equilibrium in which production is low and unemployment is
high. Keynes’s followers created econometric models inspired by his ideas.
These models were not based on utility maximization and the reasoning of
individual agents; rather, they incorporated relationships between factors
like unemployment, GDP and interest rates, based on what had happened in
the past.
Keynesian-inspired econometric models were challenged by the crisis of
high unemployment in the 1970s. In 1974, US unemployment jumped from
its previous level of about 4 per cent to almost 8 per cent. This put
policymakers under pressure to respond. As the story goes, they tried to
exploit something called the Phillips curve to bring down joblessness.5 The
Phillips curve refers to the hypothesis that unemployment and inflation are
negatively correlated, which up until then had always been the case. If
unemployment becomes low, this should push wages higher, which in turn
causes inflation. But perhaps causality also runs in the other direction? If

prices go up, would manufacturers see this as an optimistic sign and boost
production, thus hiring more workers? Policymakers gave it a try,
intentionally inflating the money supply in order to spark inflation and drive
unemployment down. But this policy failed to lower unemployment, instead
causing a nasty combination of joblessness and inflation that was dubbed
stagflation.
As crises tend to do, this spurred a big shift in economic thinking.
Prominent economists such as Robert Lucas of Carnegie Mellon argued that
this approach had failed because it neglected the consequences of human
intelligence. In his words, employers and workers alike ‘saw through the
veil of inflation’: If the price of everything doubles, and wages double, then
nothing has really changed. People realized that what the policymakers had
done was artificial, and it just made a bad situation worse.
While the Keynesian econometrics models might fit historical data, such
models ignored the possibility that decision-making might change when
circumstances did. Lucas and his allies wanted macroeconomists to take
human reasoning into account, and proposed to do this using rational
expectations. The Lucas critique revolutionized macroeconomics. From the
mid-1970s onward, rational expectations took over macroeconomics as well
as microeconomics, leading to a new family of models called Dynamic
Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models. (Stochastic is just a
synonym for random.) In a standard DSGE model, households and
companies alike use rational expectations to make decisions that maximize
their utility. In contrast to their predecessors, which were based on
statistical relationships of aggregate measures like GDP, these models
incorporated the reasoning of households and firms, and for this reason are
said to be micro-founded.
A simple standard macro-model
To understand how a standard micro-founded DSGE model works, let’s
look at an early (and simple) example that grew out of an influential model
for economic growth introduced in 1956 by Nobel prize-winning economist
Robert Solow.6 (We’re going to need this later when we compare it to a
complexity-economics version.) In Solow’s model, a household works for a
company that produces a single good. The firm and household represent all
the firms and households in the world (or at least in a given country), and

the good represents all goods and services. This is what is called a
representative-agent model, in which a single agent serves as a proxy for
many different agents. There are obvious problems with this, but the goal of
the Solow model was to provide insight by making things simple enough to
be easy to understand and solve.
In the Solow model, the firm pays the household for the labor and capital
it needs to produce the good. A key parameter, which you can think of as an
adjustable knob, is the savings rate – the fraction of its income that the
household saves. The model also has a parameter for population growth
(imagine packing the household with many millions of identical occupants).
The Solow model predicts that countries that save more become relatively
prosperous and countries with rapid population growth become relatively
poorer, and shows that the only way the economy can grow in the long run
is by making technological progress. (In this model, technological progress
corresponds to producing more of the single good with less capital and
labor.)
In the early 1960s, David Cass and Tjalling Koopmans each
independently modified the Solow model to turn it into a micro-founded
DSGE model. They did this by giving the household a utility function and
assuming that it is a rational agent whose goal is to adjust its savings rate in
order to maximize its utility.7 The household’s utility at any point in time
depends on a combination of its current consumption and its expected
future consumption. Present consumption is considered more valuable than
consumption in the future, which is called discounting. The use of
discounted utility was inspired by a 1928 paper by the British
mathematician Frank Ramsey, so the resulting model is called the Ramsey-
Cass-Koopmans model, or simply the RCK model.8
In the original Solow model the savings rate is constant, but in the RCK
model the household can adjust it through time. To maximize its utility, the
household needs to strike the right balance between savings and
consumption. On one hand, it must save to accumulate capital, but on the
other hand, it needs to consume to get utility. In the extreme case, if the
household doesn’t consume anything, the business it owns loses its only
customer; as a result, the household makes no profits and has nothing to
save. There is an optimal savings rate in the middle, which is the
equilibrium choice that maximizes the discounted utility.

If we now add shocks – for example, by letting the discount rate
fluctuate randomly – then the RCK model becomes a DSGE model. Each
external shock knocks the system away from equilibrium, but the rational
agent immediately adjusts its savings rate to compensate and get back on
the best path. Because there are ongoing shocks, the economy is always
changing; but if we turn off the shocks, the system will eventually come to
a state of rest – like a rocking chair.
Friction and other enhancements
Despite early enthusiasm for micro-founded models, during the 1980s it
became clear that they had problems matching reality. Given their
simplicity, this was not surprising, even to their advocates. While they
captured some features of the economy, there were many others that eluded
them. For example, in the early models, as the situation changes, wages
change freely to maximize everyone’s utility. In the real world, however,
workers get upset if their wages are lowered, so a company is reluctant to
lower them. This also makes them hesitant to raise them, fearing that it
might need to lower them again later. Wages play an essential role in
inflation, so the mismatch between the models and reality was a serious
problem.
In 1983, the Argentine-American economist Guillermo Calvo found a
way to fix this.9 He modified a standard micro-founded model so that wages
no longer changed in response to each fluctuation in supply and demand.
Instead, they normally remained stuck, but once in a while, at random, they
suddenly adjusted to the proper equilibrium level where wages were set so
that the demand for labor matched the supply of labor. His hypothesis that
wages are ‘sticky’ is just one example of what economists call frictions. In
the presence of friction, agents still maximize utility using rational
expectations, but real-world constraints prevent them from doing what they
would otherwise like to do. Economists have incorporated frictions in
models to make the behavior of agents more like that of real people, who
act ‘as if’ they are not fully rational. To return to Star Trek, using frictions is
like putting Mr Spock in chains: He’s still rational, but many solutions are
now off limits, so he has to work around them to find the best option.
The use of frictions was initially controversial, even within the
mainstream. One of the original motives for rational expectations was to

avoid ad-hoc assumptions about behavior, but frictions are ad hoc by their
very nature. Calvo’s critics ridiculed his sticky-wage assumption as
depending on a ‘Calvo fairy’ to sprinkle pixie dust on frozen wages to
release them. Nonetheless, frictions have now become an accepted part of
the macroeconomics toolkit. Choosing the right set of frictions and solving
the resulting models in order to better fit the data is a main line of research
in theoretical macroeconomics.
Modern micro-founded macro-models used by central banks are more
complicated than the simple RCK model. Such models are now used by
virtually all central banks in the world.10 Their forecasts are at best a little
better than those of simple statistical models, but unlike statistical models,
they can be used to test policies with ‘what-if’ experiments. (At least in
principle: As noted earlier, if their forecasts are poor, their reliability for
policy testing is questionable.)
Models at the frontier of macroeconomic research incorporate household
diversity, for example, by allowing two types of households. The rich
household makes savings decisions based on rational expectations and the
poor household lives hand-to-mouth, meaning that they do not save
anything. In what are called Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK)
models there is a continuous distribution of different households, ranging
from rich to poor. Nonetheless, like the Solow model, these models still
have only one representative industry. At the other extreme, there are
models with many industries, but only a single representative household.11
There is another class of models, called Computable General Equilibrium
models, that allow multiple industries and multiple households, but they
have no dynamics (meaning that the models cannot study the path to a
stationary equilibrium – they jump to the static equilibrium in one step). As
we’ll see in the next chapter, these limitations stem from technical
difficulties in building these kind of models (which agent-based models
avoid).
All micro-founded macro-models, even those at the frontier of research,
are based on rational expectations with frictions, and incorporate little or no
information about the non-rational behavior of real people. Changing this is
another important frontier of contemporary research.
The behavioral revolution

As rational-expectations theory took over macroeconomics in the 1970s,
dissenting voices began to speak out and gather evidence against it.
Psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky documented deviations
from rationality in decision-making, forming a close partnership with
behavioral economist Richard Thaler. There is now a long list of common
deviations from rationality, all backed by experimental evidence. People
tend to be overconfident, particularly men; for example, students do not
follow rational expectations when forecasting their grades – they
consistently overestimate their final grade, even though it should be fairly
predictable based on factors such as past performance, ability and effort
level.12 People pay inappropriate attention to sunk costs: If you’re playing
poker, for example, you should ignore how much you’ve already put in the
pot and worry only about whether your next bet is a good bet. These are just
two examples of many.
One of the big innovations of behavioral macroeconomics was the use of
experiments, pioneered by Vernon Smith.13 Up until his work, it had been
assumed that economies could not be studied in the laboratory. (The
analogy was made to astronomy: We can observe the stars, but we can’t do
experiments with them.) Smith put his students in controlled environments,
such as asking them to play a game that was like a real market. He then
asked them to make economically relevant decisions (such as whether to
sell an asset and at what price) and rewarded them based on their
performance. His experiments made it clear that markets converge to
equilibrium in some situations but not in others.14 Experimental economics
has been used to indicate when and how the economic behavior of Homo
sapiens departs from that of Homo economicus.
Not surprisingly, economics experiments were initially highly
controversial. Were the rewards large enough to be meaningful? Would
people really behave in the real world as they did in the laboratory? Despite
the initial resistance, experimental economics and behavioral economics
slowly entered the mainstream. Kahneman and Smith shared the Nobel
Prize in economics in 2002, and Thaler was awarded it in 2017.
Behavioral economics has now made the serious flaws of rational
expectations theory quite clear, but so far it has proved difficult to
incorporate behavioral alternatives into the workhorse macroeconomic
models used by central banks and treasury departments. Achieving this is a
central quest in contemporary economics, but it remains largely

unsuccessful. Economists often say that ‘it takes a model to beat a model’,
and there is still no widely accepted model that replaces rational
expectations with behavioral economics.
In the heyday of rational expectations, the three pillars of mainstream
economics fitted together nicely. To recap, in those days there was a
straightforward procedure to build an economic model:
1. Give each agent a utility function.
2. Use rational expectations – i.e., assume each agent’s beliefs are
correct and find the set of decisions that maximizes each agent’s
utility.
3. Solve for the equilibrium values of the relevant economic variables
(like prices and quantities traded).
Responding to the challenge posed by behavioral economics, some
economists have proposed replacements for step 2. One popular alternative
is to let some agents be rational while others are not. In recent years,
economists have begun trying to incorporate the findings of behavioral
economists more directly, by assuming that people make decisions based on
flawed models of the world. For example, Xavier Gabaix has developed a
macroeconomic model with myopic households who fail to look very far
into the future.15 Similarly, Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer have
created a ‘diagnostic expectations’ model, incorporating departures from
rational expectations by assuming that people overreact to news.16 These
approaches replace rational expectations with a different model of beliefs,
but they still assume that agents maximize utility, or something like utility.
This brings us to the present state of mainstream economics. As I write,
in 2023, two of the three pillars that form the foundation of standard
economic theory remain firmly in place, much as they were sixty years ago.
Virtually all mainstream economic theories continue to subscribe to utility
maximization (or some close cousin) and equilibrium. Most mainstream
theorists still assume rational expectations, though some explore
alternatives to the third pillar, agent beliefs. In contrast, as discussed in
more detail in the next chapter, complexity economics modifies or replaces
all three pillars.

Value-free modeling?
Economic models are often viewed with suspicion because they reflect the
values of their creators. The austerity debate, which we discussed in
Chapter 1, is just one of many examples of prominent economists reaching
opposite conclusions – conclusions that reflect their values more than any
underlying science. In an essay titled ‘Economics after Neoliberalism’,
Suresh Naidu, Dani Rodrik and Gabriel Zucman unintentionally make this
point:
Back in 1975, economist Carlos F. Diaz-Alejandro wrote, ‘by now any bright graduate
student, by choosing his assumptions [. . .] carefully, can produce a consistent model
yielding just about any policy recommendation he favored at the start.’ Economics has
become even richer in the intervening four decades.17
This kind of ‘richness’ concerns me. If left-wing and right-wing economists
can build models for the same thing ‘yielding just about any policy
recommendation [they] favor at the start’, the value of economics as a
reliable roadmap for all to share is seriously limited. It’s not very useful to
have one version of economic science for those on the right and another for
those on the left. As almost all economists will agree, we should strive to be
as objective and factdriven as possible. This is one of the biggest reasons
theories need to be empirically validated.
In fact, Naidu and his co-authors were trying to make a different point –
one that I agree with. They were explaining how economics has evolved
beyond the simple-minded misconceptions of neoliberalism. The
underpinnings of the Chicago school of economics, led by Milton
Friedman, used idealizations – such as perfectly functioning markets and
rational expectations – that led to conclusions supporting the school’s
libertarian leanings. But once economic models began to incorporate more
realistic assumptions, the results became more nuanced and conditional, and
most of the earlier results were shown to be wrong. This was an important
step in the right direction.
It will always be possible for researchers to fiddle with their models until
they get preconceived, desired results. But since complexity-economics
models can be founded directly on data from behavioral experiments, and
can match the structure of the economy more literally, this becomes harder
to do. In a complexity-economics model it is more obvious if someone is
cooking the books to get the answer they want. So my hope is that

complexity economics can provide a more objective framework; time will
tell whether this hope is realized.
Uncertainty vs risk
[A]s we know, there are known knowns; there are things we know we know.
We also know there are known unknowns; that is to say we know there are
some things we do not know. But there are also unknown unknowns – the
ones we don’t know we don’t know. [They] tend to be the difficult ones.
Donald Rumsfeld (2002)18
In 1921, the economist Frank Knight, who would go on to be a cofounder
of the Chicago school but was at that time at the University of Iowa, was
the first to make a clear distinction between risk and uncertainty.19 By risk
he meant situations where we know the set of possible future events and
their probabilities. In contrast, he used uncertainty to refer to situations
where we don’t know the probabilities of future events. Under what he
called true uncertainty, we may not even be able to imagine all possible
future events.
The standard workhorse macroeconomic models that are currently used
by central banks and treasury departments assume that we live in a world of
risk rather than one of uncertainty. Even if Zeus is throwing thunderbolts at
the world, we still know the possible events that can occur as a result and
the likelihood with which they will occur. These models assume that agents
make decisions as described earlier in this chapter, by listing all possible
future events, estimating their probabilities, calculating the utility of each
possible event, multiplying each utility by its probability and adding them
up to get the expected utility. The agents then select the choice that
maximizes their expected utility.
There is a large literature trying to deal with uncertainty in economic
modeling, but this is so far not sufficiently developed to be incorporated
into the workhorse models of macroeconomics. As discussed in the next
chapter, uncertainty is implicitly built into complexity economics – a
feature that makes it an attractive alternative for addressing big problems
like climate change where we cannot know all possible events, much less
assign them accurate probabilities.

...
