6.
Modeling an Uncertain and Complicated
Economy
[T]he task is to replace the global rationality of economic man with a kind
of rational behavior that is compatible with the access to information and
the computational capacities that are actually possessed by organisms,
including man, in the kinds of environments in which such organisms exist.
Herbert Simon (1955)1
Even as the theory of rational expectations was being developed in the mid-
1950s, its limitations were being criticized. One of the most prominent
critics was Herbert Simon, who is perhaps the pioneer of complexity
economics, even if that term didn’t exist in his day.2
Simon held that in real situations people often make complicated
decisions with imperfect knowledge, noting that ‘the capacity of the human
mind for formulating and solving complex problems is very small
compared with the size of the problems whose solution is required for
objectively rational behavior in the real world – or even for a reasonable
approximation to such objective rationality’.3 Simon argued that when we
are confronted with a hard problem, the cognitive limitations of the mind
make rationality moot. In his view, we seek ‘good enough’ choices rather
than optimal ones. He called this bounded rationality. His views on the
subject have been confirmed by psychologists and behavioral economists
alike. Yet despite his 1978 Nobel Prize, Simon is not a central figure in
mainstream economics – perhaps because his approach would have required
abandoning the standard theoretical assumptions that captured the
mainstream. Fortunately, Simon’s research program is far easier to
implement now than it was in the 1950s, because we now have a much

better understanding of psychology, as well as more data and far better
computer power.
Heuristics
Real people don’t solve day-to-day problems by doing complicated math
calculations. As a simple analogy, let’s consider two ways of playing
baseball. Imagine Mr Spock in center field. Let’s contrast his rational
approach to that of a human baseball player.
When a fly ball is hit, Spock knows that his team’s utility will be
maximized if he catches the ball before it touches the ground. To make this
happen, he measures the position and velocity of the ball. He then solves
Newton’s laws to compute the ball’s estimated landing point and runs to
that point in the field.
This is how we predicted the game of roulette using a computer in
Chapter 1, but it isn’t the way real center-fielders catch baseballs. A human
baseball player uses simple rules of thumb that she may not even be
consciously aware of. For example, she waits until the ball is sufficiently
high in the air, then fixes the angle between her body and the ball and
begins running to maintain this angle as consistently as possible. If she
succeeds, she’ll automatically be in the right place to catch the ball.
This rule of thumb is called the gaze heuristic.4 Baseball players use it
(along with other rules of thumb) to help catch fly balls. Dogs use it to
catch Frisbees, and sailors use a similar technique to determine whether
they’re on a collision course with another boat. Unlike Mr Spock’s method,
it doesn’t require any math calculations and takes complicating factors like
wind into account. It doesn’t always result in optimal behavior – a player
may first back up and then run forward – but it is useful in practice.
The term heuristic comes from a Greek word meaning ‘to find out or
discover’. Heuristics are simple mental processes that humans, animals and
organizations use to quickly form judgments, make decisions and find
solutions to complex problems. We use heuristics all the time. To decide
whether or not to buy an umbrella, trial-and-error provides a simple
alternative to rational expectations: If you have recently been drenched, you
are more likely to remember to carry your umbrella. Or you might observe
that your friends all carry umbrellas and imitate them. Imitation and trial-
and-error are examples of common heuristics that work well in many

different contexts. In the next chapter we’ll revisit the Solow model, and see
how an agent-based model that replaces rational expectations with these
two simple heuristics leads to a surprising example of emergent behavior.
We’ve already seen a powerful and widely used heuristic in action, in the
way real-estate agents set house prices, initially offering the house at a price
slightly higher than the current market. If the house doesn’t sell, they mark
it down and wait for a buyer, repeating the process until it finally sells.
Psychologists call this heuristic aspiration-level adaptation. It is commonly
used in many other contexts, like selling used cars. Aspiration-level
adaptation proved very useful in our agent-based housing model, since it
allowed housing prices to roam far from the point where supply equals
demand, better matching reality (see Chapter 4). Although aspiration-level
adaptation is easy to simulate in a computer, it isn’t easy to write down and
solve equations for it. As a result, because of their desire for models with a
mathematical underpinning, mainstream economists are loath to use it.
A long list of heuristics have been identified by psychologists, with
names like the availability heuristic, the representativeness heuristic, the
anchoring heuristic, the affect heuristic, the consistency heuristic and the
control heuristic – and many others.5 Unlike utility maximization using
rational expectations, which requires knowledge that most of us don’t have
and math calculations that most of us can’t do, heuristics are quick and
simple, operate on limited information and require little or no math.
Heuristics have verisimilitude. Psychology experiments show that real
people rely on them. They’re not the only way we solve problems, but
they’re an essential component.
You might think that because heuristics are simple, they cannot be a
good way to predict the future. But in uncertain environments simplicity is
a virtue.6 As psychologist Gerd Gigerenzer and his colleagues have
documented, there are many situations where heuristics make better
predictions than more complicated methods. This is called the less-is-more
effect.7
Portfolio choice provides a great example. Given a choice between
different assets, like stock or bonds, how much of each should you hold in
your portfolio? Suppose, just for the sake of argument, that you know their
expected future returns, as well as their volatility and their correlations with
each other. Harry Markowitz of UC San Diego got the 1990 Nobel Prize in
economics for using rational expectations to find an optimal formula for

how much of each asset you should buy in order to make the largest
possible return on your portfolio (on average) for a given level of risk.8 This
is a simple and elegant result – but there’s a problem.
Later, in Part III of the book, I will describe my adventures as a
quantitative financial trader, but let me give a little preview that illustrates
how a simple heuristic outperforms Markowitz’s ‘optimal’ result. In 1991, I
was one of the founders of an enterprise called Prediction Company. In our
early days, we developed strategies for trading currencies, and we wanted to
decide what fraction of our trading capital to allocate to the model for each
currency. I bought a standard textbook on finance written by Eugene Fama
and read the chapter on portfolio theory.9 It presented Markowitz’s method
as the right way to solve this problem, without any caveats. I tried it and
discovered that it worked fine – as long as the expected return and risk for
each currency strategy were known perfectly. But when I made a more
realistic test, by pretending I was at some point in the past and didn’t know
what would happen in the future, the results were terrible.
The reason for the poor performance of Markowitz’s formula is
uncertainty. At Prediction Company, it was impossible for us to know
precisely how well the strategy we applied to each currency would actually
perform in the future. Based on Markowitz’s formula, small variations in
the expected risk and return made the allocation to each currency vary
wildly. In fact, the trading system always did better if we used the simple
heuristic of assigning equal weights to each currency. Later I found out that
Markowitz himself knew the same thing: Ironically, when he invested the
money from his Nobel Prize, he used a portfolio with equal weights to pick
a few of his favorite stocks rather than the formula he received the prize for
discovering.10,11
This brings up a key point: When testing a model, one should focus on
its ability to make predictions about the future, rather than its ability to fit
past data.12 Unfortunately, most studies in economics don’t do this. Models
that fit past data well but fail to make good predictions on data they have
not seen are worthless. Heuristics often perform relatively poorly at fitting
data, but they nonetheless frequently make better predictions of the future.
The portfolio example is just one of many where heuristics outperform
rational expectations in realistic settings. This is because our library of
heuristics has developed through a process of cultural evolution to help us
deal with uncertainty, which is a pervasive feature of the real world.13

Modeling behavior directly
Heuristics are a good example of what I call modeling behavior directly. In
contrast to utility, which is cumbersome to observe and must be inferred
indirectly, behavior is observable and easily measured – in the laboratory or
using data collected via surveys, censuses, the internet, or any forum that
records people’s decisions. Modeling behavior directly means developing
rules that encapsulate the way people actually make decisions. Utility
theory, in contrast, deduces people’s decisions from their preferences.
Utility theory often relies on ‘as-if’ arguments, while modeling behavior
directly is grounded on ‘as-is’ arguments, at least when it is done well.
Of course, heuristics are only part of modeling behavior directly. Even if
our ability to reason is finite – we are only boundedly rational – we
nonetheless use reasoning to solve many problems, and we need to take this
into account. We have a variety of different methods for doing this; we have
ways of deciding which heuristics to use in different situations, and we
combine heuristics with other (usually simple) modes of reasoning.
As an example, consider how people – as opposed to computers – play
complicated games like chess. There are about 1040 possible sequences of
moves in a chess game; even the most powerful supercomputer can
examine only a tiny fraction of such sequences. Human chess players solve
this problem using a mixture of experience and intuition. The goal – to
checkmate your opponent’s king – looms in the distance at the start of the
game, which on average takes about 40 moves but can take as many as 200.
A human player can look only a few moves ahead – seeing further becomes
too difficult because of the explosion of possibilities. The problem must be
broken into pieces and addressed one step at a time.
Checkmate usually requires first gaining an advantage over the
opponent. This can be a piece advantage or a position advantage, or a
combination of the two. To gain a piece advantage, we’re guided by
heuristics such as ‘a queen is better than a rook’; to gain a position
advantage, we use heuristics such as ‘control the middle of the board’. This
narrows things down so that we need consider only the most promising
lines of attack – seeing whether we can swap a rook for a queen, for
example, or positioning pawns to better control the middle. In this case,
heuristics guide our limited powers for logical reasoning so that we use
them more effectively. And as we gain experience, we develop intuition that

allows us to search more efficiently and to know which heuristics to use
when.
Following in Herbert Simon’s footsteps, Gerd Gigerenzer and economist
Reinhard Selten have proposed that an essential part of problem-solving is
our ability to draw on an ‘adaptive toolbox’ of heuristics.14 The toolbox is
adaptive because the heuristics we deploy depend on the situation. Our
intuition helps us guess which heuristics to apply, and we learn by
experience, favoring heuristics that have been successful recently and
abandoning those that have performed poorly. Gigerenzer calls this way of
solving problems ecological rationality.15 The word ecological emphasizes
that our cognitive strategies exploit the representation and structure of
information (heuristics, search, learning, simple reasoning) to make
reasonable decisions. Unlike rational expectations, ecological rationality
allows us to cope with the fundamental uncertainties we encounter in day-
to-day life.
Learning is another important way we solve problems. This has been
extensively studied in psychology, computer science and behavioral
economics, leading to the development of standard algorithms that
characterize how people learn. A good example is reinforcement learning,
in which actions that have worked well in the past become more likely and
actions that have worked poorly become less likely. While reinforcement
learning doesn’t fully capture how real people behave, it provides a
reasonable approximation in many circumstances.
In the early part of the twenty-first century the field of machine learning
– which is essentially the application of sophisticated learning algorithms –
has exploded. Problems that previously seemed out of reach in artificial
intelligence, like facial recognition and speech recognition, are now
routinely solved by artificial neural networks (which are just another type of
learning algorithm). Complicated neural-network models that have been
trained on a vast corpus of human text, like ChatGPT, are writing student
term papers and making tasks like computer programming much easier.
Mainstream economists are beginning to use machine learning for
statistical data analysis, as an alternative to traditional econometrics. That
said, with a few exceptions, using learning algorithms to simulate the
behavior of agents in models is the domain of agent-based modeling.16,17
Learning algorithms are easy to incorporate into agent-based models. For
example, a corporation might be assigned the goal of maximizing profits.

The model could then be given a learning algorithm that uses experience
over time to arrive at better decisions. This is a bit like utility maximization,
except that it doesn’t guarantee perfection – the decisions can be far from
optimal – and it can be applied even in complicated settings, using
information that is plausibly available. The explosive advances in machine
learning provide a huge opportunity for agent-based modeling that is still in
its early stage. The challenge is not to create models where the agents use
the ‘smartest’ possible learning algorithms, but rather to faithfully mimic
the way people actually make decisions.
Modeling behavior directly is still an unfinished research program.18 So
far, there’s no one-size-fits-all method that tells us how people will make
decisions in any given situation. In the meantime, agent-based modelers
have cobbled together their own models of behavior, which incorporate
many different elements. Here are some of the ways agent-based modelers
incorporate behavior:
• State the obvious. There are many circumstances for which there is an
obvious decision rule. For example, a class of stock traders called
value investors (think Warren Buffett) follow the rule ‘buy
undervalued assets’.
• Ask experts, like psychologists and sociologists, who have done lab
experiments or field studies or performed surveys to understand how
people made decisions in a similar context.
• Study data where similar decisions have been made. In our housing
model for Washington DC, for example, we used data from the US
census on people’s housing choices, conditioned on income and
wealth.
• Do experiments in the context of the model. One can slow down an
agent-based model to human speed, unplugging the computer’s
decision-making algorithms and replacing them with the decisions of
real people, and then build a model mimicking the choices of the
human decisionmakers. This is a promising approach that remains
largely unexplored.19
• Use learning algorithms to train agents to make better decisions
through time. This is the closest thing to a one-size-fits-all approach,
and is the way agent-based models answer the Lucas critique.

Although there are many learning algorithms, they often lead to similar
behaviors.
In mainstream economics there is a very clear and explicit formula for
modeling behavior, but the procedures used in agent-based modeling to
model behavior directly, as the list above shows, are less cut and dried.
They require more judgment on the part of the modeler. At the end of the
day, what matters is whether the models are able to represent the economic
world with sufficient verisimilitude to make good predictions.
Exploring the wilderness of bounded rationality
If instead we take the view that prices themselves may adjust sluggishly, we
enter the wilderness of ‘disequilibrium economics’.
Chris Sims (1980)20
Although they have similar goals, mainstream economics and complexity
economics model the world completely differently. To see the difference
clearly, let’s recap the standard modeling template from Chapter 5, updating
it to account for the rejection of rational expectations by behavioral
economics:
1. Give each agent a utility function (or some other way of ranking the
desirability of different outcomes).
2. Give each agent a model of beliefs (which might be based on rational
expectations or on something more behaviorally grounded) and find
the set of decisions that selfishly maximize each agent’s utility, subject
to these beliefs.
3. Solve for the equilibrium values of the relevant economic variables
(like prices and quantities traded).
Complexity economics replaces this with agent-based modeling, which
follows a completely different template:
1. Assign each agent a method for making decisions. This can involve
heuristics, simple reasoning, search, learning, or a mixture of any of

these. When learning algorithms are used, goals may need to be
assigned to some agents, but these need not be utility functions.
2. Mimic the institutions, market mechanisms and other economic
factors that are actually involved, with as much verisimilitude as
necessary (remembering that it can be counterproductive to introduce
details that don’t matter).
3. Simulate the collective interactions of the agents as time unfolds.
Both methods have their pros and cons. In simple settings, it is reasonable
to model real agents ‘as if’ they follow rational expectations. If things
change sufficiently slowly, equilibrium is a plausible assumption. Then we
can use the standard framework to write down equations and solve them.
This has the advantage of being simple, comprehensible and easy to
implement.
In contrast, agent-based modeling is more useful in complicated settings
where agents do not plausibly understand things well enough to reason ‘as
if’ they follow rational expectations, or where things are changing
sufficiently fast that equilibrium is not a plausible assumption. Agent-based
modeling more easily captures the rich structure and interactions that play
important roles in the real economic world. There is much more latitude in
how things can be done, depending on the problem that needs to be solved.
A key difference is in step 3. In the standard template, equilibrium is
assumed from the outset – there is no consideration of what might happen
outside of it. The complexity-economics template makes no such
assumption; rather, as the collective dynamics unfold, equilibrium is a
possible outcome, which may or may not be attained.
I like to visualize the quest to find better models of human reasoning as
exploring a wilderness, like the cartoon in Figure 8. This metaphor is
inspired by a warning that is given to young economists who are tempted to
venture into complexity economics: There is a danger of getting lost in the
wilderness of bounded rationality. There is only one way to be rational, but
there are an infinite number of possible ways to be boundedly rational. This
makes it easy to get lost. Hence, aspiring economists are encouraged to
stick to the well-known path offered by the standard framework.
This advice is partly sound. The human mind is complicated, and until
we have a good model of how it works, well supported by empirical
findings, there is a danger of getting lost by trying out half-baked models.

Rational expectations is like a gate leading into the wilderness of bounded
rationality, which provides a useful reference point. By keeping this gate
carefully in sight, the mainstream hopes to avoid getting lost. It is a poor
approximation of reality when the economic setting gets complicated, but it
is a useful guide in simple settings. It provides a well-defined point of
departure that can be built on to incorporate more realistic assumptions and
get closer to the truth.
But this advice is missing something important: Rational expectations is
not the only way to enter the wilderness. Complexity economists like to
enter through a different gate, on the other side of the wilderness, by
assuming instead that people make decisions in very simple ways.
Heuristics, for example, require very little reasoning to implement and sit at
the opposite end of the intelligence spectrum from rational expectations. As
an extreme case, starting with ‘zerointelligence’ agents, who literally make
decisions at random, as if they were throwing darts at a dartboard, can be
very useful. Maria’s occupational labour model in Chapter 3 provides a
good example: Workers simply apply for jobs at random – their only
intelligence is in knowing which jobs they are suited for. Such zero-
intelligence models also provide a well-defined point of departure that can
be built on by incrementally adding learning or incorporating more
knowledge from behavioral economics.21 They provide an alternate gate
into the wilderness of bounded rationality.

Figure 8. The wilderness of bounded rationality. The human brain is complicated, like a wilderness,
and creating a reliable model of the way we make decisions is difficult. To avoid getting lost, it helps
to start with simple assumptions and build incrementally more complicated models. Rationality is the
conventional starting point used in economics, but heuristics, and even the extreme assumption of
zero intelligence (random decision-making), provide useful and much less developed alternative
reference points.
To make good economic models we should use both gates, depending on
which is more effective for solving the problem at hand. In Chapter 8 we
will even see an example where it was useful to go through both gates at
once and meet in the middle.22 To capture the complex and complicated
nature of real economies, we need to thoroughly explore the wilderness of
bounded rationality, entering through both gates.
Tractable models for complicated economies
The real economy – the one that we live and work in – is a complicated
beast with many interacting moving parts. The agents whose behavior needs
to be modeled include firms, households, banks, financial investors and
governments. There are many different kinds of firms producing many
different goods and services. Poor people behave differently than rich

people, and old people behave differently than young people. Financial
globalization and trading connect the economies of 195 different nation-
states. Building a macroeconomic model that takes all this into account is
challenging.
I think there are serious limitations to utility maximization as a
foundation for quantitative models, but my opinions on this are
controversial, and since this book is not about criticizing mainstream
economics, I have reduced them to an endnote.23 There is, however, one
problem with utility maximization that is uncontroversial: In complicated
situations, the equations become very hard to solve. To quote two
prominent economists, Xavier Gabaix and David Laibson:
Tractable models are easy to analyze. Models with maximal tractability can be solved with
analytic methods – i.e. paper and pencil calculations. At the other extreme, minimally
tractable models cannot be solved even with a computer, since the necessary
computations/simulations would take too long. For instance, optimization is typically not
computationally feasible when there are dozens of continuous state variables – in such cases,
numerical solution times are measured on the scale of years or centuries.24
A realistic model of a complicated economic phenomenon like the 2008
financial crisis requires understanding the behavior of many agents and
many institutions, which require ‘dozens of continuous state variables’ to
represent them. The reason that standard models fail is because they require
calculating the optimal decisions for each agent. It can be difficult for real
people to do this, and it becomes impossible even for a computer to do it
when things get complicated.25 The tractability problems of the standard
modeling approach are unavoidable: It will never be possible to make
successful models of complicated real-world situations that take the many
interacting moving pieces of the economy into account.
In contrast, agent-based models don’t try to find optima, so they don’t
suffer from this problem. In our housing model, for example, we considered
as many as 100,000 households, all of whom differed from one another. We
had not dozens, but hundreds of thousands of continuous-state variables. It
would have been impossible to maximize each household’s utility function
while taking all the others into account. Instead, we mimicked the way that
real households behave. At each step, each agent processed the information
available to her and used simple heuristics to make decisions. Each agent’s
decisions consumed very little computer time, and as a result we could

model 100,000 heterogeneous agents on a laptop. This will never be
possible for a standard model based on utility maximization.
Agent-based simulation can easily incorporate realistic assumptions
about the complicated structure of the economy. We can come closer to
modeling the complexities of the real world, gaining verisimilitude in two
different ways: The decisions of the agents can be more realistic, and the
structure of the economy can be more realistic. But the most important
consequence is that we can make tractable models, ones that produce
solutions even when things get complicated. Whether or not direct models
of behavior are more realistic than utility maximization (or its variants) will
likely remain controversial for some time. However, the tractability
problem of utility maximization for confronting complicated economic
problems is not controversial.
This point was hammered home to me when I gave a presentation for the
Macrofinancial Seminar at the London School of Economics in 2018. I was
invited by Wouter den Haan, who is one of the leading European
macroeconomists. After the seminar I met with a few expert micro-founded
macro–modelers. To my surprise, they peppered me with procedural
questions: ‘How do you do this? How do you do that?’ They were
particularly keen to know how much effort it took to build and extend more
complicated agent-based models. When I asked them why they were asking
me all these questions, they began describing how much painstaking effort
was required to add new features to their models.
In Chapter 5 you may have wondered why there are no microfounded
models that can simultaneously deal with the diversity of households and
firms in a realistic way. The reason is that building complicated micro-
founded models using rational expectations is hard, and one rapidly reaches
a point where adding more realistic features becomes impossible. Agent-
based models, in contrast, are only limited by the size and speed of the
computers that run them. With a big enough budget for cloud computing, it
is now feasible to build a model that includes every person and every firm
in the world. Perhaps more importantly, it is possible to include all the
relevant economic effects that cause the economy to change.
...
