8.
Inefficient Markets
Observing that the market was frequently efficient [efficient market theory
adherents] went on to conclude incorrectly that it is always efficient. The
difference between these propositions is night and day.
Warren Buffett1
What does the financial system do?
The essential function of the economy is to structure and coordinate our
work, and allocate resources, including human capital. In a thriving
economy, individuals are far more effective than they would be if we had to
survive on our own. The financial system plays a subtle but essential role in
directing this coordination.
If the economy is the metabolism of society – its ‘digestive tract’ – the
financial system is analogous to the brain in our gut, which helps us digest
food. This is formally called the enteric nervous system, but is also
nicknamed the gut brain or the second brain. It stretches from the
esophagus to the rectum, and has half a billion neurons, five times as many
as in the spine and almost as many as the entire nervous system of a cat. It
directs the activities of the digestive system while operating almost entirely
independently of the brain in your head. If your gut brain ceases to function,
you lose the ability to digest food, and, without intravenous feeding, you
die. The digestive system is just another name for our metabolism, which
the gut brain guides and controls. Remarkably, even though we can’t live
without it, very few people have ever heard of the gut brain.
Analogously, the key function of the financial system is to guide and
control the economy by determining what we will or will not produce. It
plays an important role in processing information and making allocation
decisions. Like the gut brain, the financial system (in a capitalist economy)

operates more or less autonomously, though it needs regulatory guidance in
order to work well. How much regulation it should have, and what kind, is
hotly debated.
Shipwrecked on his desert island, Robinson Crusoe could consume only
the fruits of his own labor – for him, money would have been useless. But
as Adam Smith pointed out, in a modern economy we are able to specialize,
and we do this by using money to consume the fruits of the labor of others
and to allow them to consume ours. The financial system does its job by
controlling where money goes. Fundamentally, money directs what we
work on and what we produce. Someone says, ‘Hey, I’ve got a good idea
for a product and the competence to bring it to market,’ and a rich person
responds, ‘Okay, I believe you, and if you’ll give me a cut of the profits, I’ll
give you some money.’ Then a team of people goes to work with a common
purpose. In an ideal world, people who work in the financial system provide
a valuable service by processing information and making decisions so that
effort and resources are allocated where they can be most effective.
Contracts are an essential tool of the financial system. They operate by
structuring the flow of money and activity over time. Ownership of a stock
or a bond is a contract, relating an investment at one point in time to
payments at other points in time. Other contracts include loans, mortgages,
employment agreements, insurance policies, patents, pensions and wills.
Contracts specify the commitments of parties to one another and
synchronize their activities. They can also transfer risk – for example,
through insurance policies. If an airline wants to lock in the price of jet fuel,
it can buy a contract allowing it to transfer the uncertainty about future
prices to someone else. Contracts coordinate our actions by making future
commitments and dependencies clear.
Contracts form a vast web.2 They are an important component of the
network of balance sheets, connecting us in space and time. Each contract
sits on someone’s balance sheet, either as an asset or a liability. The
relationship is reciprocal; my liabilities are someone else’s assets. The
insurance policy on my house says that if it burns down, money flows from
others (who may be far away) to me, so that local people can rebuild my
house.
As discussed in Chapter 2, economics can be viewed as a combination of
accounting and human decision-making. Contracts are an essential part of
accounting, which is a mechanical process following a set of simple laws.3

The web of contracts is like a set of wound springs linking us all together;
as the conditions in the contracts are triggered, the springs unwind and
prescribed actions take place, affecting our decisions. If we could know the
web of all contracts in detail, we could make powerful predictions about the
global economic system from this information alone.
The financial system provides a mechanism for processing information
and making decisions in the economy. The way it does this is subtle,
generating debates about how well it functions. The efficient-markets
hypothesis assumes that the system functions perfectly. My theory of
market ecology, described in Chapter 10, offers a complementary view.
According to that theory, the inefficiencies of the financial system are
fundamental to its operation; admitting that markets are inherently
inefficient, and understanding what causes these inefficiencies, is essential
to understanding why markets can malfunction.
The relative size of the financial system in the economy has grown
enormously in recent history. Shortly after World War II, the US financial
sector accounted for 2.8 per cent of GDP; by 2006, it was 8.3 per cent.4 In
1980, a typical financial-services employee earned about the same wages as
her counterpart in other industries; by 2006, employees in financial services
earned an average of 70 per cent more.5 Between 1969 and 1973, only 6 per
cent of Harvard undergraduates went into financial services after
graduation; by 2008, this had grown to 28 per cent.6 This suggests that the
financial system is directing an increasing amount of money and effort
toward itself rather than toward the rest of the economy.
Is the increase in resources devoted to the financial system necessary
because the economy has become more complex, requiring more
information to make sound investments? Is this increased effort stimulating
more innovation or increasing the efficiency of production? Or are we
suffering from an ailment where our collective gut brain has gone rogue,
and is engaging in cancer-like activities rather than doing its job?7 Perhaps
major components of the financial system do nothing more than act as a
global casino for the very rich, while destabilizing the economy with little
positive benefit to the economy as a whole? In this part of the book, I will
argue that a complex-systems point of view can help answer these
questions.
The financial system is a vast complex system unto itself, with an array
of interacting institutions. These include regulated entities like commercial

banks, investment banks, insurance companies, mutual funds, pension
funds, hedge funds, private equity funds, venture-capital funds, housing
markets, stock exchanges, central clearing parties, security and investment
dealers, and specialinvestment partnerships – as well as a host of other
entities that constitute the shadow banking system, which creates credit
without regulatory oversight. However, the Fed’s FRB/US model and its
counterparts throughout the world use simplified models of the financial
system that lump most (usually all) of these diverse institutions together.
The complexity-economics approach, in contrast, can take the differing role
of each type of institution into account, in order to better understand how
the financial system functions, and explain why financial crises occur and
what we can do to fix them.
Beating the stock market
In 1985, while I was an Oppenheimer Fellow at Los Alamos, I began
mentoring my second graduate student, John Sidorowich (universally
known as Sid). Sid and I worked on a research project that merged my
earlier collaboration on predicting roulette with the Dynamical System
Collective’s work on identifying chaos, as described in Chapter 1. We took
advantage of the fact that chaos is a double-edged sword: On one hand,
chaos imposes fundamental limits to long-term prediction; on the other, it
means that data that otherwise look random can be predictable in the short
term.
There are many situations where useful models can be built even with no
fundamental understanding of causality. The best predictions of sunspots,
for example, are made by fitting a simple mathematical model to historical
records of sunspot levels.8 The work I did with Sid showed that if random-
looking behavior is caused by simple chaos, one can take advantage of this
to make better predictions than those made using standard time-series
(historical) models. Our research led to a 1987 paper called ‘Predicting
Chaotic Time Series’.9
Our method made good predictions as long as we had enough data and
the mechanism underlying its randomness was simple chaotic dynamics.
Some of the phenomena we predicted included weakly turbulent fluid flow,
sunspots and ice ages. I frequently spoke about this work at seminars and
conferences and, when it came time for questions, someone would

inevitably raise their hand and ask, ‘Have you tried applying your methods
to the stock market?’ I knew nothing about finance, but the question came
up so often that I couldn’t help thinking about it. I got tired of answering,
‘No.’
By 1991, I had been at Los Alamos for nearly a decade. I had great
collaborators and really liked my complex-systems group. But I was
spending too much time on administration, fund-raising and dealing with
government bureaucracy. What to do instead? I kept reflecting on the
question that everyone always asked about my work on prediction. Was it
possible to beat the market? At that time, the debate was dominated by
Eugene Fama, a professor in the business school at the University of
Chicago who would go on to win the 2013 Nobel Prize in economics. Often
regarded as the ‘father of modern finance’, he argued strongly in favor of
the efficient-markets hypothesis, which says that getting an advantage by
predicting stock prices is impossible.10
The efficient-markets hypothesis flows automatically from the
assumption of rational expectations. If investors are rational, then stock
market prices should fully and accurately reflect all available information,
and prices should change only when new information enters the market.
New information is by definition unpredictable (or it wouldn’t be new);
ergo, future changes in prices should be random. Fama and most other
financial economists at the time believed that trying to predict stock prices
based on publicly available information would be pointless. I didn’t think
this could be true, and I liked the idea of disproving it.
Fama was not the first to suggest that stock-price changes are random. In
fact, financial markets were the original inspiration of the random-walk
model, introduced by the French mathematician Louis Bachelier in 1900. In
his PhD dissertation, he proposed that the price of a stock today is the price
yesterday plus a random number, and the price tomorrow is the price today
plus a different random number, and so on.11 This is like a drunk who
randomly steps to the right or to the left, with no bias toward moving in
either direction. If the drunk starts at a tavern door, where is he after 100
steps? Knowing the size of his steps, and assuming that steps to the right or
left are equally likely, we can compute the probability that the drunk will be
at any given distance from the tavern. But he is equally likely to end up on
the right or the left; we cannot predict the direction of his movement.
Similarly, if stock prices follow a random walk, we can estimate how far

prices will drift from current prices after a given time, but not whether the
change in price will be up or down.
Beating the market seemed like a good challenge, so in 1991 my
childhood friend Norman Packard and I teamed up again and recruited
another old friend from Santa Cruz, Jim McGill, to run the business side of
things. We started Prediction Company, which in hindsight was one of the
earliest successful quantitative hedge funds. We made a deal with the
options-trading firm O’Connor and Associates, which was eventually
acquired by Swiss Bank Corporation, which itself later merged with the
Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS). They provided us with all the
investment capital we needed, and we got a cut of the profits; our job was to
find and implement a good trading strategy. For us, the stock market was
like a casino, only the stakes were much higher, you didn’t have to hide
your computer, and they didn’t throw you out or break your kneecaps for
winning.
At the time we knew very little about finance or economics, so we
treated the stock market as a vast stream of numbers. Our strategy was to
find ‘pockets of predictability’ in historical prices that recur more often than
they should at random; we would then make bets based on these patterns.
This book is not about beating the market, so I won’t go into detail about
what we did. Nonetheless, our systematic approach, which allowed us to
beat the market, provides some valuable methodological lessons that are
relevant to making better models of the economy.
Data and infrastructure were the foundation of everything we did at
Prediction Company. We collected all existing historical data on US stocks.
This included not just prices and trading volume but options, insider-trading
reports, analyst estimates and anything else we could lay our hands on. We
hired a few really good computerprogrammers and developed a framework
that let us automatically process vast amounts of data using an array of Sun
workstations, which were the most affordable powerful computers then
available. We created a special-purpose language for processing financial
data and developed a database program to quickly process prices and other
data. The resulting infrastructure made it easy to build models and simulate
trading.
Using machine learning and other statistical methods, including a few
we invented ourselves, we discovered several predictable patterns, but we
also realized that there was a great deal of useful information in the

published literature in finance – particularly in papers claiming to find
violations of efficient-market theory. For example, such a paper might say,
‘We tested trading rule X on stocks in the S&P index between 1970 and
1991 and showed that it produced returns 5 per cent in excess of those of
the S&P index.’ Because of the strong bias toward efficient markets, papers
like this were hard to get published, but some still managed to make it into
print, mostly in second- and third-tier journals. Our powerful framework
allowed us to rapidly and easily test whether the results of papers like this
were correct. We systematically tested the results of every published paper
that claimed to find deviations from randomness in stock markets.
The results were sobering, suggesting that, at least on this topic, the
published work was not reliable. For around half of the papers, we couldn’t
reproduce the results, even when we tested the postulated deviation from
efficiency using the same data. The results in another fourth of the papers
were correct when we used the same data but failed when we tested the
hypothesized method using different time periods or stocks. Fortunately, the
remaining fourth we tested contained useful, reproducible results.
Nonetheless, when taken by themselves, none of the trading rules in the
validated papers produced the steady profits we were seeking. Even if the
overall returns were good on average, they were uneven; the risk was too
large for our weak stomachs. But when we combined the trading rules from
all of the validated papers with those we found on our own, the result was
an effective trading system. As a result, Prediction Company made
substantial returns that were about five times steadier than those of a typical
mutual fund or stock index.12
When we started Prediction Company, Eugene Fama was quoted in a
popular science magazine as saying that the odds of our success were ‘not
zero, but they are very, very low’.13 This was a cute way of saying that, even
though stock prices are random, there was always a small chance that we’d
get lucky. The metaphor Fama and others liked to use was of monkeys with
typewriters: If enough monkeys type long enough, one of them will
eventually duplicate Shakespeare’s complete works.
A statistical analysis of our trading results makes it abundantly clear that
our steady profits were not due to chance. Prediction Company ran for
twenty-seven years, with only one losing year – 2007.14 The odds of
achieving Prediction Company’s track record at random are vanishingly
small. Our performance showed that, with the right information and the

right model, one can take advantage of hidden patterns in stock prices. We
proved that, strictly speaking, the efficient-markets hypothesis is wrong.
And we weren’t the only ones; although we were among the first, a few
other firms did even better.
After eight years at Prediction Company, I was eager to get back to basic
research. In the process of becoming an expert on the stock market, I had
also begun to read more widely about finance and economics and had
concluded that economics needed new ideas. While mainstream economics
had flirted with chaos and complex systems, neither had taken hold. This
created an opportunity to do something new.
At Prediction Company, we built successful models that made good
predictions, but the models were black boxes that didn’t explain the
mechanisms that caused the inefficiencies we exploited. We had to keep our
models secret, which meant they contributed little or no value to society as
a whole. I wanted to build models that could explain why markets behaved
as they did – models that anyone could use and that would help solve the
world’s problems. This led me back to the Santa Fe Institute, where I began
doing basic research on financial markets.
How well does the market do its job?
Let’s revisit the question of how well markets do their job. As discussed,
financial markets are supposed to help us allocate our efforts so that they’re
productive. But what does beating the market have to do with the way we
allocate effort?
The phrase market efficiency has two senses. The first, ‘allocative
efficiency’, means that prices are always set correctly, so effort is allocated
appropriately. Stock prices help people decide how to do that: If the price of
pork bellies goes up, more farmers will grow hogs. The second,
‘informational efficiency’, means that you can’t increase profits by making
better predictions about stock prices. If all investors are rational and operate
within perfect markets, everyone’s utility is maximized, and the market is
efficient in both the allocational and informational sense.15 In this
idealization, the statement that the market casino cannot be beaten is
equivalent to saying that resources are allocated correctly. However, this
depends on strong assumptions that aren’t well-supported in practice. Under
more realistic assumptions – for example, when investors are boundedly

rational – these two different notions of efficiency are no longer equivalent.
In fact, as I will argue, they can be really different.
To better understand the logic behind the efficient-markets hypothesis,
let’s make an analogy to traffic. Suppose there are two possible routes from
City A to City B. Without traffic, the travel time for each of the two routes
is the same, but if there is traffic, one may be faster than the other. If
everyone has access to traffic reports and chooses the fastest route, then the
faster route will gain more traffic until the travel times adjust so that they’re
the same. If this happens everywhere, the traffic system is efficient in the
informational sense, because no one can do better by picking a faster route,
and in the allocative sense, because cars are using the road system as well
as possible to keep everyone’s travel times as short as they can be. But
there’s a built-in contradiction, because if everyone believes that everyone
else is processing the information needed to choose the best route to make
the system efficient, then all the routes are the same, and there is no
incentive for anyone to process information, which will make the system
inefficient.
A famous joke illustrates the paradoxical nature of the efficient-markets
hypothesis. Eugene Fama and a friend are walking down the street when
they see a $100 bill. Fama says to his friend, ‘There’s no point in picking it
up. It must be counterfeit, or someone would have picked it up already.’ To
this I can add a true story: About two years after we formed Prediction
Company, Norman and I left our office on Aztec Street in Santa Fe to go to
lunch. We looked down and saw a $50 bill. We picked it up and used it to
buy an especially nice lunch at our favorite New Mexican restaurant. The
money may have been counterfeit, but the lunch was delicious.
The introduction of Google Maps shows how efficiency depends on
technological progress. By providing useful information about travel times,
Google Maps has substantially altered our driving habits and made the road
system more efficient.16 Similarly, in the next section we will see how
computer technology moved the reference point for market efficiency in
finance.
Econophysics, market impact and the usefulness of efficient
markets

The efficient-markets hypothesis has been controversial since its inception,
but while it is no longer the iron-clad pillar it once was, it is still one of the
central ideas in mainstream financial economics.17 Our experience at
Prediction Company and that of other successful trading firms shows that,
strictly speaking, the hypothesis is wrong. However, this doesn’t mean it
isn’t a useful approximation for some purposes. There are situations where
it works very well and others where it fails miserably. The efficient-markets
hypothesis is a good approximation for understanding some aspects of
markets when they are functioning properly. At the same time, it is
manifestly wrong: It predicts that markets never fail, which defies both
experience and common sense. We’ll explore some examples that illustrate
both points, beginning with some success stories.
The first is simple: The theory of rational expectations, which predicts
that the market should be efficient, explains why it is hard to beat the
market. While I am proud that we succeeded in beating the market, it
wasn’t easy; creating our first strategy making consistent, reliable profits
took five years of hard work for me and twenty others at Prediction
Company. This is a good example where market efficiency, while not
strictly true (our results disproved it), is a reasonable approximation.
Another success story is derivative pricing. Derivatives are financial
instruments whose value is based on other assets (their price is derived from
those assets). The classic example is a stock option, which allows you to
buy or sell a stock at a given price (called the strike price) at a given time.
This can be very useful to a business: An airline that wants to ensure that
rising oil prices won’t cut too much into its profits, for example, can buy an
option to purchase oil at a fixed price, no matter how high the market price
rises.18
Mathematical methods for pricing options are based on the efficient-
markets hypothesis. This is done by assuming that the underlying stock
price follows a random walk. For example, suppose we want to estimate the
value of an option to buy – a call option. We do so by computing how often
and by how much the random walk for the underlying price rises above the
strike price. The idea is simple: If the price of the underlying stock fails to
rise above the strike price, the value of the option is zero; but, in cases when
it surpasses the strike price, its value is the price that was reached minus the
strike price. The value of the option is then computed by averaging all
possible realizations of the random walk. (This idea was introduced at a

practical level by Edward Thorp and Sheen Kassouf and refined by Fischer
Black, Robert Merton and Myron Scholes.19)
A much less well-known use of the efficient-markets hypothesis is for
deriving the shape of the market-impact function, which describes how
changes in supply or demand affect price. When a trader decides to buy an
asset, the demand for that asset rises, which tends to drive its price up. The
market-impact function quantifies the average increase in price in response
to initiating a trade of a given size. Remarkably, the market impact function
has a universal shape – that is, it’s the same in all markets where it’s been
tested: stocks, bonds, commodities and currencies.
I have chosen this example for several reasons: market impact is
practically important; its universal shape illustrates a quantitative ‘law’ in
economics, much like those in physics; and the theory that was developed
to understand it illustrates how it can be useful to enter the wilderness of
bounded rationality from both gates.
First, its practical importance. At Prediction Company, we worked hard
to understand our market impact because, since you make money in
markets by buying low and selling high, it lowered our profits and was the
gating factor on how much money we could successfully manage.20 Market
impact increases with trading size, meaning larger orders are bought at
higher prices and sold at lower prices than small orders. This limited the
amount we could profitably buy and sell; if we tried to trade too much
money, the market impact became too large and our profits went to zero.
Prediction Company was among the first to carefully measure market
impact. We did this by recording the price just before our orders hit the
market and just after they were executed. We anticipated that market impact
would go up linearly with order size, or perhaps even faster than linearly. In
fact, we found just the opposite: It increased at a slower-than-linear rate. In
other words, small orders had a larger market impact per share than large
orders, so that the shape of the curve describing the shift in price became
progressively flatter with increasing order size. We found that the shift in
price increased roughly as the square root of the size of our trade (a fact that
has now been extensively confirmed).21
This was great news for us, because it allowed us to trade at larger
volume and make more profits than we would have expected. But it was
also a puzzle – why should market impact look like this? Furthermore,
though our overall impact in heavily traded assets was lower than in lightly

traded assets, the curve had the same square-root shape for all assets. Why
should this be?
At Prediction Company, we didn’t have time to pursue questions purely
for their own sake. We just accepted that market impact was roughly
described by a square-root function and used this to optimize our trading
strategy. But after returning to basic research, I was keen to understand why
this was true.
To understand why the universal shape of market impact is so
remarkable, let’s revisit the law of supply and demand, which is perhaps the
most important and most reliable principle in economics. The law of supply
and demand says that prices tend to move to the place where supply equals
demand, so if supply goes up, prices go down, and if demand goes up,
prices go up. It’s a powerful and useful law, but there is no good theory
explaining the shape of supply and demand curves. When Professor Gurley
sketched the curves on the blackboard in my Economics 1 class at Stanford,
as mentioned in the introduction to Part I, the price could be any increasing
function of demand and any decreasing function of supply. Restated in
physics jargon, there is no universal functional form.22 While economists
derive the shape of supply and demand curves from economic theory, this
depends on the utility function chosen for the agents – different utility
functions lead to differently shaped curves. But there are many possible
utility functions, with no good empirical justification for one over the other,
so even if everything else in the theory is right, the result can at best be
qualitatively correct.
Market impact is closely related to supply and demand – it indicates how
much the price changes when demand or supply changes. But if the supply
and demand curves can take any form, how could the market impact be the
same in many different markets? This seemed to be an important clue about
something fundamental to economics.
The story of how we came to understand market impact intertwines with
my own personal narrative. It involves a movement called econophysics
that emerged in the late 1990s, around the time I left Prediction Company.
During the latter half of the twentieth century, finance had become
increasingly mathematical. The job market in physics had grown tight in the
late 1960s, and, because physicists are good at math, more and more of
them were hired on Wall Street to work on tasks such as derivative pricing.
Econophysics took this a step further, as physicists began doing basic

research in economics – writing and publishing papers in academic journals
rather than just doing applied research for hire.
The arrival of physicists in economics, as part of the econophysics
movement, was met with some resistance by economists. The physicists
weren’t just trying to help economists with their math problems; they were
suggesting conceptual frameworks that were often contrary to those of
economists. The new assumptions and ways of thinking that physicists
wanted to import into economics were frequently antithetical to economic
orthodoxy. The economists felt under attack, and they weren’t going to let
the physicists into their club, so if physicists wanted to be part of a research
community, they needed to create one for themselves. Two of the leaders in
creating this movement were H. Eugene Stanley, a very distinguished
physicist from Boston University, and the Sicilian physicist Rosario
Mantegna. In 1999 they wrote a book called Econophysics, and the name
stuck.23
There are several ways in which physicists approach science differently
than economists do. Physicists are taught to stay as close to the data as
possible; theories should emerge from empirical observations. Economists,
on the other hand, are taught to build theories and then test whether they
match the data. Their justification is that, unlike in physics, economic data
is so noisy that one needs a theory to make any sense of it.24
Another important difference is that physicists believe that theory must
ultimately seek to be quantitative, in a strong sense. It is not enough to say
that matter attracts other matter, as Descartes did; the theory of gravity
became useful only when Newton asserted that the gravitational force
decays inversely with the square of distance. When combined with
Newton’s other famous law, F = ma, this allowed him to predict the motion
of planets and comets far into the future.25
This is why physicists like me got so excited about the possibility of a
universal law for market impact. It suggests that there is a quantitative law
for changes in supply and demand in economics, a bit like the inverse-
square law of gravity. This was doubly exciting because market impact is a
kind of force. From a trader’s point of view, market impact is like friction –
it bleeds away profits. But, from the point of view of a complex-systems
scientist seeking to understand how markets work, it is an interaction rule:
Trading changes prices via market impact, and changes in prices cause
trading, and so on. (This runs directly counter to the mainstream view,

which holds that price movements are strictly due to new information.)
Market impact relates to how quickly prices approach equilibrium, so it is
an important clue about what happens out of equilibrium, partially
answering one of my original questions to Professor Gurley.26
When I left Prediction Company to rejoin SFI, one of my goals was to
understand the square-root law of market impact. I thought it would be
useful to look at the way trades are actually made. The most common way
to organize trading in modern markets is via what is called the limit-order
book. Market participants can place orders to buy or sell at a given price or
better. If these orders don’t result in immediate transactions, they are placed
in the limit-order book, which has a list of all the active quotes.
Most theories of financial markets are based on rational investors.
Inspired by some earlier work, I decided to do just the opposite and assume
that people put orders in the limit-order book and canceled them at random,
except for the fact that everyone keys off the current price.27,28 What would
happen in that case? Would we recover the square-root law of market
impact? I teamed up with several SFI collaborators, including Marcus
Daniels, László Gillemot and Giulia Iori, and the effort was led by our
brilliant colleague Eric Smith.29 The zero-intelligence assumption allowed
us to explain several interesting properties of limit-order books using
powerful mathematical methods from statistical physics.30 This led to some
strong, empirically testable predictions. For example, an important property
of the market is the bid–ask spread, which is the difference between the
highest-priced buy order and the lowest-priced sell order in the limitorder
book for a particular stock at any point in time. We compared our model to
real data and were able to accurately predict the bid–ask spread based on
rates of order placement and cancellation.31
There were, however, parts of our model that didn’t fit. We were
disappointed that we didn’t reproduce the square-root law of impact very
well. While the impact function had the right shape – the slope decreased
with order size – it changed depending on assumptions about the flow of
buy and sell orders into the market, and it often deviated substantially from
a square-root function.
And there was something else that we couldn’t explain: Even though the
agents in our model placed random orders, the resulting price movements
weren’t random. Rather than making a random walk, the price movements
were mean-reverting, meaning that, if the price went up at one point in

time, it was more likely to go down at the next point in time. Rather than
being equally likely to step left or right, the drunk tended to reverse himself
– if he stepped right, his next step was more likely to be to the left. This was
puzzling. We had expected random order-placement to yield an efficient
market, but instead it yielded a market inefficiency, that is, a predictable
pattern in the prices.
This problem was solved in an elegant way by fellow econophysicist
Jean-Philippe Bouchaud and his collaborators. Jean-Philippe is both a
strong mathematician and a brilliant statistical physicist, who also runs a
successful hedge fund. He realized that our model showed that order-flow
could not be random. If it were, it would create an arbitrage, meaning that a
clever trader could make money from the non-random movement in prices.
He and his collaborators demonstrated that the assumption of market
efficiency implies the square-root law of market impact.32 Or, said
differently, imposing the compatibility of a purely random order-flow with
price unpredictability mechanically leads to a square-root impact law.
The upshot is that market efficiency leads to a universal quantitative law
for changes in supply and demand, much like the laws of physics. To
summarize: In order to be consistent with the operation of the limit-order
book, the shifts in prices caused by placing orders must increase as the
square root of order size – otherwise there is an inefficiency that can be
exploited by arbitrageurs.
In Chapter 6, we discussed the metaphor of exploring the wilderness of
bounded rationality. Mainstream economists like to enter the wilderness
through the front gate of rational expectations, while complexity
economists like to enter it through the back gate. Both seek to understand
the bounded rationality of real people that lies somewhere in between,
deeper in the wilderness. The story of how we explained the square-root
law of market impact is a good example of how it can be useful to first
enter through the back door, then use the front door.
Random order-placement is an example of a zero-intelligence model –
the exact opposite of rational expectations – an idea introduced by the
economists Dhananjay Gode and Shyam Sunder.33 While zero-intelligence
models are a bit far-fetched – people are at least somewhat intelligent – they
can provide a very useful starting point. If agents have no intelligence, then
they are like atoms in physics. This is what allowed Eric Smith, who was
well-trained in the branch of physics called statistical mechanics, to

construct a nice theory for what goes on inside the limit-order book, which
led to simple formulas allowing us to make empirically testable predictions.
The term zero-intelligence makes people laugh: When a summary of our
paper was translated into Russian, it erroneously said that our main result
showed that ‘traders are complete idiots’. The Russians thought this was so
funny that it was posted on the leading Russian website for jokes, where it
got a huge number of hits. Nonetheless, by exploring the consequences of
agents with no intelligence whatsoever, we could better understand the
dynamical properties of limit-order books. We showed that this market
institution is not inert but, rather, has its own characteristic dynamics –
suggesting that a little intelligence needed to be added to make a model
whose predictions were consistent with reality. In this case, the assumption
of market efficiency, which is a consequence of rational expectations,
provided the extra element needed to get the right answer.
The slow and uncertain path to market efficiency
The opposite of market efficiency is market inefficiency, which translates
into a persistent profit-making opportunity. The argument for efficient
markets depends on the idea that buying drives prices up and selling drives
them down, causing market inefficiencies to quickly disappear. An investor
who processes information and weighs the merits of one stock against
another and trades accordingly is called an arbitrageur. If Apple stock is
underpriced, arbitrageurs will buy it and drive the price up until it’s
properly priced. According to received knowledge, their action should
quickly remove any future opportunities to make profits, making the market
efficient.
But as already noted, this argument is self-contradictory: Market
efficiency requires arbitrageurs who are attracted by profits. However, if
markets are perfectly efficient, then there are no profits to be made by
arbitrageurs, and therefore no reason for them to participate in the market.
This means markets cannot be perfectly efficient – perfect market efficiency
is inherently paradoxical.
The advocates of efficient markets are aware of this paradox.34 They
respond that, although arbitrageurs make profits, these are small – big
enough to motivate the arbitrageurs but small enough that market efficiency
is still a good approximation. The real debate is about whether or not

deviations from market efficiency are important. Are they big enough to
make a difference?
The proponents of market efficiency also argue that clever investors
rapidly discover and exploit any market inefficiencies and return the market
to an efficient equilibrium. But, assuming this happens, how long does it
really take? Our research at Prediction Company produced one of the few
published results on this.35 Our most successful strategy was something
called statistical arbitrage. We built the strategy using eight years of
historical data from the late 1980s and early 1990s. Then, when we
suddenly acquired data going back to 1975, we were able to test our
strategy on data over a twenty-three-year span. The results, which provide a
sobering contradiction of the mainstream view, were really surprising.
As already mentioned, we built our trading strategy by taking advantage
of many different types of market inefficiencies. We could tell when the
market was behaving inefficiently because prices or other quantities
behaved in a particular way, flagging that an inefficiency was present. We
called these informational flags signals. One of our best signals was
associated with what is called convergence trading. We would look for
similar stocks, one of which was overpriced and one underpriced, and bet
their prices would converge. Another signal used analyst estimates as its
inputs – if analysts upgraded their estimates for a stock, this signal
predicted it was likely to increase in price for a while, and vice versa.
Though we combined all the signals in our trading strategy, each of them
could also act as a stand-alone trading strategy. When we measured the
profits from these two signals over a long span of time, we saw that, though
they changed in different ways, they were both very persistent. While our
convergence trading signal made excellent profits throughout the 1990s, if
we had been able to execute it in 1975, our analysis showed that we would
have made phenomenal profits. Although the performance of this signal
steadily declined over the twenty-three-year period by roughly a factor of 3,
it was still going strong in 1998. Does this mean the glass was half full or
half empty? An advocate of efficient markets would emphasize that the
profits decreased with time, indicating that the market was becoming more
efficient. True, but it was certainly taking its time in doing so. What we
observed was not at all the rapid return to market efficiency postulated by
proponents of the efficient-markets hypothesis.

The behavior of the analyst-estimate-based signal was even more
striking. No one could have traded this signal until 1984, when a regulatory
change made the data it needed available in a timely manner. This signal’s
profits were initially very low, but they steadily grew over the next fifteen
years. This is exactly the opposite of what the theory of market efficiency
would predict! The fact that the market became increasingly inefficient over
time is a strong contradiction of the efficient-markets hypothesis.36 How
could this be?
Why is the path to market efficiency so slow? There are several
reasons.37 The first has to do with the challenge, in statistical analysis, of
distinguishing the signal (the information useful for prediction) from the
noise (the random background fluctuations that make it harder to detect the
signal). To create a quantitative trading strategy, investors must identify
weak signals in a noisy background. Even for good trading strategies, like
those we used at Prediction Company, the signal is about twenty times
weaker than the noise.
To create a reliable trading strategy we had to accumulate enough data to
be able to pick the signal out of the noise – more data improves the
accuracy of statistical tests. For signals like these, it takes around five years
of data to effectively distinguish the signal from the noise. When you factor
in the time it takes to detect the signal, develop and test the strategy, and
convince someone to provide capital, it can take decades for a trading
strategy to be discovered and reach maturity.
An advocate of market efficiency might say that the mere fact that the
signal-to-noise ratio for trading signals is so small supports market
efficiency. In a sense, I agree: It is challenging to beat the market. But huge
profits result from small inefficiencies, and as I will argue in Chapter 10,
this can lead to substantial market failures.
The second reason that market inefficiencies can be so persistent is
technological progress. At Prediction Company, we used computers to trade
1,000 stocks every day, without human intervention. In 1975, it would have
been impossible to implement our trading strategy with the computers and
data-management technology available at the time.
Finally, as the market becomes more efficient, it approaches perfect
efficiency more and more slowly. If the market ever managed to reach
perfect efficiency, all trading signals would disappear. The closer the market
comes to perfect efficiency, the weaker the signals become, which means

they take longer to detect, making the continued approach ever slower. In a
2009 paper called ‘The Reality Game’, Dmitriy Cherkashin, Seth Lloyd and
I showed that this is true, even in an idealized setting.38 (To be more precise,
we showed that the inefficiency decreases in time as a power law, which
approaches zero much slower than an exponential.)
This explains why the approach to efficiency is so slow, but not why
inefficiency can sometimes increase over time. The simple explanation is
that the landscape is always changing. The participants in the stock market
change. The rules change. New financial instruments, such as mortgage-
backed securities, are introduced. Innovation takes time. New strategies
often render old strategies less effective, but they can also make them more
effective. Because market participants are only boundedly rational, the
capital invested in a given strategy may grow too large and create
instabilities. New inefficiencies continually emerge from the shifting
landscape; it can take decades to detect them, and as a result, the market
never settles into the efficient nirvana that Eugene Fama and others
imagine.
Even small inefficiencies can have a big effect on how well markets
function – small informational inefficiencies can cause large allocational
inefficiencies. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 10, to fully understand this
process, we must think about market dynamics in ecological and
evolutionary terms. But before we do so, let’s look at some other ways in
which market inefficiencies manifest themselves.
...
