9.
The Self-Referential Market
October: This is one of the peculiarly dangerous months to speculate in
stocks. The others are July, January, September, April, November, May,
March, June, December, August, and February.
Mark Twain1
The efficient-markets hypothesis also has implications about how prices
respond to outside news. Markets have endogenous dynamics – prices
change on their own, even without news affecting fundamental valuations.
Put differently, markets make their own news.
The 1987 stock market crash
1987 was an important year for complexity economics, for two reasons.
First, it was the year of the SFI meeting on ‘The Economy as an Evolving
Complex System’, mentioned in the introduction to Part I – a meeting that
eventually led to the creation of two influential agent-based models that
help us understand why prices behave as they do, and why market
inefficiencies can cause market malfunction.
The second stimulus to complexity economics occurred later that year,
on October 19, when the US stock market lost more than 20 per cent of its
value in a single day. A drop in prices of this magnitude is huge: The stock
market reflects the total worth of the biggest companies, whose value is a
substantial share of the US economy. If you believe the market is always
right, this means that almost a fifth of the value of the real economy
disappeared in one day. Markets can change quickly: The real economy
makes measurable changes every quarter or every year, whereas financial

markets can change significantly in a day. The market normally changes by
less than 1 per cent on any given day, so this event was twenty times bigger
than normal.
What caused such a precipitous drop? For the fundamental value of the
real economy to drop this much in one day, something really big would
need to happen, such as the discovery that Earth might collide with an
asteroid or that we were on the brink of nuclear war. But there was no real
news that day. How could such a significant financial event come out of
nowhere?
Before the 1987 crash, the biggest overall drop in the stock market
occurred on October 28–29, 1929, when the market lost 25 per cent in two
days. The Great Depression that followed profoundly affected the entire
world and lasted for more than a decade, driving unemployment in the US
to 25 per cent at its peak. The 1987 crash immediately caused everyone to
worry that another Great Depression was on its way, provoking mass
anxiety. But, nine months later, the stock market was back where it had
been, and there were few long-term economic consequences.
While debates about the causes of the 1987 crash continue, most experts
believe that automatic trading by computers, called program trading,
played an important role.2 The following explanation is a bit technical, but
it illustrates how the act of exploiting a small informational inefficiency can
cause a huge allocational inefficiency. In this case the problem was the
unstable feedback effects caused by the interaction of two specialized
trading strategies.3
In the years leading up to the crash a new strategy called portfolio
insurance was introduced, which was designed to insulate investors against
a market crash. When the market goes into freefall, it can be hard to sell
individual stocks at reasonable prices, whereas it is much easier to sell an
S&P futures contract. (The S&P index consists of a basket of 500 large
companies, and an S&P-index-futures contract allows the owner to buy the
underlying stocks in the index at a given point in the future at a given
price.) With portfolio insurance, when the market starts to fall, a computer
automatically sells S&P futures on behalf of the owners of the insurance.
The goal of the insurance is to raise cash and protect investors against
losses due to sudden declines in the prices of the stocks in their portfolios.
The other trading strategy that caused problems, called index arbitrage,
looks for discrepancies between the index’s underlying stocks and the index

futures. If the underlying stocks in the index are overvalued relative to the
index-futures price, index arbitrageurs sell those stocks. When the stocks in
the index eventually once again match the index, they buy the stocks back
and make a profit.
The interaction of these two strategies caused an unintended side-effect:
During the crash, the use of portfolio insurance triggered an automatic
response, creating a feedback loop that couldn’t be stopped, making the
problem it was trying to protect investors against much worse. When the
market dropped, the computers sold S&P index futures. The resulting
market impact pushed the price of the S&P futures index down. Then index
arbitrage kicked in. The market impact from this caused the prices of the
stocks to drop even further. The combination of portfolio insurance and
index arbitrage meant that the more that prices dropped, the more shares
were automatically sold, which meant that prices dropped even more, and
so on, throwing the market into a death spiral. Combined with the fact that
investors were already nervous that the market was overvalued, this caused
an enormous crash, which was only stopped when prices got so low that
there were huge bargains. The brave souls who stepped in made enormous
profits.
Thus we see how the unanticipated interaction between an innovation
that was designed to reduce risk and a profit-making strategy that normally
makes the market more efficient resulted in a gigantic departure from
market efficiency: What probably should have been a small downward
correction in prices turned into Armageddon.4 Even the most sophisticated
investors aren’t fully rational, and almost no one anticipated this outcome.
The crash offered dramatic evidence that markets can be far from efficient,
and it provided a great example of systemic risk – in this case, an
unanticipated (negative) emergent property of a market caused by a poorly
understood financial innovation.
Even though the economy recovered quickly, the 1987 crash
permanently changed views about market efficiency. Before the crash, most
financial economists were, as noted, strong believers in the theory of
efficient markets. But the crash forced a careful reexamination of views
about markets and their relationship to the real economy, and exposed the
flaws of logic based on the idea that investors are rational. If investors had
been perfectly rational, they would have foreseen the dangers of portfolio
insurance and behaved very differently. Market failures occur precisely

because investors are not rational. Despite this, rational-expectations
equilibrium continues to be the dominant mainstream framework for
understanding markets. In contrast, in Chapters 10 and 11 we’ll see how
complexity economics offers a better framework for understanding why
markets fail.
The market makes its own news
The October 1987 crash was just one remarkable event in a month full of
them: Five of the ten largest changes in the US stock market between World
War II and 1989 occurred around this time – an example of clustered
volatility. Volatility refers to the amplitude with which prices vary,
regardless of whether the movements are up or down. Clustered refers to
the fact that large market moves tend to be bunched together. Most of the
time, if the market is hot it’s likely to remain hot, and if it’s cool it’s likely
to remain cool.
An example is shown in Figure 10, which shows the price returns for the
S&P index on successive days from 1929 to 2023. The return is just a name
for the relative change in price – if the price increases from 100 to 105, then
the return is 5 per cent. The size of the vertical line is the return on a given
day. The large moves are clustered together.
Figure 10. The clustered volatility of price movements. The daily returns of the S&P index measured
in per cent from 1929–2023.
Without clustered volatility, large market movements like the 1987 crash
would be impossible. Under Louis Bachelier’s random-walk theory, if the
step sizes of the drunk are all the same and he takes many steps, the
distribution of possible distances he can be from the tavern after a given
number of steps follows a bell curve – that is, a normal distribution. If the

drunk takes n steps, each of size 1, then he can potentially be found a
distance n away from the tavern, but his typical distance away is only the
square root of n. For example, if n = 10,000, his typical distance away is
100 steps. Because it’s extremely unlikely that all his steps are in the same
direction, finding him at a distance 10,000 steps away from the tavern is so
rare that for all practical purposes it never happens. Similarly, if daily stock
returns followed a normal distribution with a typical size of 1 per cent, a
movement of 20 per cent would be essentially impossible.
Because of clustered volatility, a more accurate model of stock prices has
to take into account the drunk’s changing moods. When he’s feeling
energetic, he takes large, rapid steps; when he’s lethargic, he takes slow,
small steps.5 If he’s in a particularly energetic mood, he may suddenly move
a long way from the tavern. The distribution describing the size of his steps
in markets has fat tails, meaning that large moves are far more common
than they are for the thin-tailed, normal distribution. While really large
movements like the 1987 crash are rare, they do happen a few times a
century.
According to models based on rational-expectations equilibrium, any
variation in the size of price returns must be due to new information, so
large market moves should correspond to important new information. If
stock-price movements show clustered volatility, this must be due to the
clustered volatility of this new information. But, as we have already seen,
there was no discernible news-related cause for the mammoth 1987 crash.
To test whether changes in stock prices are driven by news, the well-
respected economists David Cutler, James Poterba and Larry Summers
published a paper in 1989 entitled ‘What Moves Stock Prices?’6 Summers,
who went on to become President of Harvard and Secretary of the Treasury
under Clinton, had attended the 1987 ‘Economy as an Evolving Complex
System’ meeting at SFI. I’ve always wondered whether that conference had
any influence on his 1989 paper. Summers has a remarkable pedigree as an
economist, being the double nephew of two of the most famous economists
who ever lived, Kenneth Arrow on his mother’s side and Paul Samuelson
on his father’s.
Cutler, Poterba and Summers began by finding the 100 largest daily
fluctuations in the S&P 500 index between 1946 and 1987. They then
looked at the New York Times on the day after each move and recorded a
summary of the paper’s explanation for the price change. The authors made

a subjective judgment as to whether these explanations could plausibly be
considered ‘real news’ – or at least real enough to have triggered a sizable
change in stock price. The New York Times’s explanations for the dozen
largest daily price moves are shown in Figure 11.
The explanations for the 20 per cent drop on October 19, 1987, were
‘worry over dollar decline and rate deficit’ and ‘fear of US not supporting
dollar’. Cutler, Poterba and Summers didn’t classify this as news, and I
agree. ‘Worry’ and ‘fear’ are subjective statements about the emotional state
of the market that have no specific reference to external events. Markets are
a place where worry and fear are appropriate and normal emotions. If your
investment advisor is not worried about losing your money, you should fire
her.

Figure 11. Does news explain clustered volatility? The 12 largest moves in the S&P index from 1946
to 1987. The first column ranks the moves, the second gives the date, the third the size of the move,
and the fourth a summary of the New York Times explanation. Moves that Cutler, Poterba, and
Summers rated as ‘real news’ are shown in grey.
The first example of real news among their list is the fifth-largest price
movement, on May 28, 1962; the news that day was ‘Kennedy forces
rollback of steel-price hike’. This is something that happened outside the
market which should have affected investor decisions. Other examples of
significant news items are ‘Eisenhower suffers heart attack’ and ‘outbreak
of Korean War’. Of the dozen largest price fluctuations, only four were
attributed to real news events, a ratio that they found also roughly applied to
the largest 100 moves.

Their paper offers strong evidence that the market frequently makes its
own news – that is, it often operates according to its own internal dynamics
rather than responding to external events. The clustered volatility of the
market is also evidence of this phenomenon: The three largest moves
between 1946 and 1987, and five of the twelve largest moves during those
years, all occurred during October 1987. The market was extremely volatile
that month, but none of the fluctuations were driven by external news. You
might also notice that nine of the twelve biggest movements were negative.
Prices go down faster than they go up!
Some of the explanations for these biggest fluctuations stand out. The
reason given by the New York Times for the fourth largest move, on
September 3, 1946, was ‘no basic reason for the assault on prices’. I doubt
that explanation will ever appear in the New York Times again, even if it’s
true; the press always gives a reason, whether or not it’s justified. Perhaps
journalists were more honest in the old days? Another good explanation was
‘investors looking for quality stocks’. Did they mean to imply that on other
days investors were looking for inferior stocks?
Cutler, Poterba and Summers’s conclusions have since been further
substantiated.7 Subsequent studies refute the efficient-markets hypothesis
(at least in terms of allocational efficiency). While news events can
influence stock prices, the majority of price movements have little to do
with current affairs. Markets appear to have their own internal dynamics.
Can we measure financial-market efficiency in quantitative terms? This
question was put to a panel of experts at a three-day conference that John G.
and I organized at SFI in May of 2000, called ‘Beyond Equilibrium and
Efficiency’. We invited a group of leading financial economists – including
leading behavioral economists, such as Robert Shiller and Richard Thaler –
along with leading econophysicists and complexity economists. The
mainstream economists spoke on the first day, the complexity economists
and econophysicists spoke on the second day, and the third day was for
discussions. This proved to be a naïve way to organize the conference:
Almost all the mainstream financial economists skipped the second day and
went sightseeing. As a result, the discussion on the third day was not very
enlightening.
Nonetheless, we did have a lively formal debate about market efficiency
on the evening of the conference dinner. There were two teams, with three
people arguing in favor of market efficiency and three arguing against. The

latter team consisted of Shiller, Sanford (Sandy) Grossman and me. As
measured by the crowd reaction among the mainstream figures, we lost the
debate. It wasn’t even close. This was in part because my two teammates
largely agreed with the other side. Somehow, during the discussion, a
consensus emerged among the mainstream economists that ‘markets are
about 97 per cent efficient’. As they would freely admit, we don’t have a
good way to measure deviations from efficiency in quantitative terms.
Looking back, the debate was confused by the fact that we weren’t clear
about what this really meant.
In hindsight, I would answer that the efficiency of the market depends on
which kind of efficiency you are talking about. It is indeed hard to beat the
market. The fact that the signal-to-noise ratio of strategies like Prediction
Company’s are about 1:20 indicates that markets are close to informational
efficiency. But the Cutler, Poterba and Summers result indicates that only
about a third of daily market movements occur in response to meaningful
external events. This suggests that, from an allocative point of view, the
market is about 33 per cent efficient. My favorite summary of this
dichotomy is due to Fischer Black, one of the inventors of options pricing.
In a paper titled simply ‘Noise’, he made a tongue-in-cheek statement that I
will paraphrase as, ‘I believe in efficient markets: prices are within a factor
of two of fundamental values 90 per cent of the time.’8 By this he meant
that, yes, prices loosely reflect fundamental values, but they often fail to do
so very well. This was borne out in a 1981 paper by Robert Shiller, who
compared the Dow Jones index to the valuation of the companies in the
index based on their dividends.9 The correct way to compute fundamental
values is debated, but Shiller’s study suggests that prices make large swings
from fundamental values, indicating that markets are on average less than
50 per cent efficient. (Which is why I was particularly disappointed when
he agreed with the 97 per cent argument.)
This is not just an esoteric debate. As we will see in the next chapter, the
fact that markets can stray far from fundamental prices on their own means
they can malfunction, misguiding the economy. As the crisis of 2008
showed, this can have serious consequences, like causing unemployment to
surge. Acknowledging that markets are inefficient could lead us to theories
that would help us understand what causes malfunctions so that we can
better guide our economy.

While the Cutler, Poterba and Summers paper is widely cited, its main
lesson seems not to have been fully absorbed by mainstream economists. To
my knowledge, no extant equilibrium model offers a reasonable explanation
for clustered volatility that is consistent with their results. The only models
that plausibly explain it – those we are about to discuss – allow the market
to be out of equilibrium.
Complexity economics captures the moods of markets
The Cutler, Poterba and Summers study suggests that it is ‘as if’ the market
has moods. What causes them? Several of the early complexity-economics
models explain this ‘moodiness’.
Brian Arthur and John Holland were among those in attendance at the
1987 SFI meeting. Though never really part of the mainstream, Arthur was
an economist at Stanford at the time. Holland was a computer scientist and
one of the founding figures of complex-systems science and machine
learning, whom I had come to know well after inviting him to visit Los
Alamos in 1982. After the 1987 meeting, the two of them teamed up with
Blake LeBaron, an economist who was then a graduate student of José
Scheinkman and now teaches at Brandeis University, and the physicist
Richard Palmer. These four reconvened at SFI in subsequent years and
formed an interdisciplinary research team seeking ways to explain clustered
volatility in financial markets. They built an agent-based model for
financial markets now called the Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market model.10
Their goal was to understand what causes the market to stray from
equilibrium and make its own news. To do this, they built a computer
simulation of a market with heterogeneous agents using diverse investment
strategies.
The model’s agents were simulated traders, who were offered a choice
between investing in a stock or a bond. The stock paid dividends of variable
size, while the bond paid a steady (but lower) interest rate. Each simulated
trader was a boundedly rational agent with an ‘artificial brain’ based on a
machine-learning algorithm, invented by John Holland, called a classifier
system.11 Their artificial brains allowed them to form their own expectations
and make decisions based on past experience. The agents could choose their
source of information. They could take account of the recent behavior of
prices, and base their decisions on these and other technical indicators, or

they could base their decisions on fundamentals, such as dividend
payments, or they could do both. Unlike a real market, which is full of
unknowns, in the Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market the researchers were like
gods: They knew everything about their artificial world because they had
created it themselves. They knew the statistical process by which the stock
paid dividends. This allowed them to experiment with imbuing all the
simulated traders with perfect rationality by overriding the classifier system
and replacing it with expectations that were objectively correct within their
artificial world. When they did this, as expected, the market obeyed the
rational-expectations equilibrium: The stock price stayed near the correct
valuation based on its dividend stream and fluctuated only when new
information arrived. In this experiment, the market was perfectly efficient
and everything happened just as rational expectations predicts it should.
However, when the agents in the model lost their divine guidance and
became boundedly rational, forming their own views with the classifier
system, the market’s behavior became more realistic. In this case, current
and future prices remained largely uncorrelated, as they are in the real
world (and as predicted by rational expectations). However, the volatility of
prices was much higher than predicted by rational expectations (as it is in
the real world). Furthermore, the volatility was clustered – quiet periods
were interspersed with bursts of noisy behavior, as happens in a real market.
The market appeared to be making its own news, just as Cutler, Poterba and
Summers’s study says the real market does. The clustered volatility of the
Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market model was an emergent property,
generated by the interactions of the market with itself.
To figure out what caused the clustered volatility, the researchers could
look inside the brains of their artificial traders. They found that the artificial
traders spontaneously formed an ecosystem of specialists. Some of them
became value investors, focusing their attention on understanding the
dividend stream. Others became technical traders, dedicated to
understanding patterns in prices. Many of these technical traders were trend
followers, who bought the stock whenever its price started to trend upward
and sold it when it trended downward. The relative proportions of value
investors and technical traders fluctuated: When the trend followers became
active, the market was volatile; when they were inactive, it was quieter.
Individual artificial traders sometimes switched between these two
strategies, but most of them chose a strategy and stuck with it.

The Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market was a complicated model,
requiring serious software effort to reproduce. In parallel research,
published around the same time, William ‘Buz’ Brock of the University of
Wisconsin and the Dutch mathematician/economist Cars Hommes found
similar results using a much simpler model.12 Their model’s set-up was
similar to that of the Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market model; the agents
chose between a stock and a bond. But in the Brock-Hommes model, agents
were given an explicit choice between a value-investor rule and a few
simple technical trading rules. They could monitor the success of each rule
and switch to the ones that recently performed best. At different times,
different rules tended to dominate. Brock and Hommes observed clustered
volatility and fat tails in price returns, just as in the Santa Fe Artificial Stock
Market model.13 Since these models came out, many other agent-based
models have explored similar ideas and confirmed the same basic results.
The best models achieve a good quantitative match to real data, generating
uncorrelated directional price movements, clustered volatility and price-
movement distributions that closely match real markets.
The underlying explanation of this behavior is essentially ecological.
During calm periods, the fundamentalists dominate. However, if for some
reason prices happen to move in the same direction several times, trend
followers start to do well, more of the agents are attracted to trend
following and their influence on the market grows. This generates a positive
feedback loop, launching a boom in which prices exceed fundamental
values, which causes the value investors to sell. When the trend followers
eventually run out of new capital, the upward trend falters, and, when prices
drop, the trend followers start selling too, and prices converge toward
fundamental values again.
These models provide a plausible explanation for the lack of
correspondence between price movements and news. In Chapter 11, we will
explore another family of agent-based models – those that study the
implications of the use of credit, which also leads to clustered volatility.
Both families of models assume bounded rationality and allow deviations
from equilibrium.
There are two reasons that agent-based models for markets haven’t
received much attention from mainstream economics. The first is that, like
any agent-based model, they run counter to the central tenets described in
Chapter 5. Another, better reason is the lack of useful quantitative

predictions. These models provide an explanation for why clustered
volatility occurs, and they do a good job of matching the statistical
properties of real markets, but so far they have no useful practical
applications.
This is changing: For example, it was recently shown that models of this
type can provide better predictions of clustered volatility than standard
models.14 They are also beginning to be used by banks to understand and
even predict systemic market failures, and I am hearing more and more
rumors that some hedge funds are using them. We’ll discuss these practical
developments at the end of Chapter 11, but, before we do so, it’s worth
further developing the conceptual framework provided by my theory of
market ecology, which helps explain how and why markets deviate from
efficiency, and how this can cause them to malfunction.
...
