10.
Ecology and Evolution in Finance
My journey from market anthropologist to market ecologist
When Prediction Company began, in 1991, our expertise was purely in
making predictions based on historical data. We needed funding and none
of us knew anything about financial markets, so we decided to look for a
partner with the capital and financial expertise we lacked. Someone needed
to go to Wall Street, and I was the chosen delegate. Since I had never owned
a suit, everyone felt that the company should buy one for me, but in the end
I paid for it myself. (After describing my mission to the fussy sales assistant
in the best men’s shop in Santa Fe, he spent hours making sure I had exactly
the right cut, the right tie and the right kind of shirts, shoes and socks.) I
began making trips from Santa Fe to New York, Chicago and San
Francisco, searching for a partner. In one year, I called on at least twenty
Wall Street firms, including Kidder-Peabody, Salomon Brothers, Goldman
Sachs, Renaissance, D. E. Shaw, Tudor Investment, Citibank, Bank of
America, and O’Connor and Associates. I was struck by how different these
firms were from one another – a difference reflected in their trading
strategies, their vocabulary and even the way they dressed and talked.
I felt like an anthropologist studying another culture. In trying to learn
their jargon and worldviews, I quickly realized that they belonged not to a
single tribe but to different tribes within a larger community. Even in the
same firm, there were sometimes distinct subcultures: At Bank of America,
on one floor everyone told me that fundamentals were all that mattered,
while on the floor below everyone said fundamentals were useless and
technical trading signals were the only thing worth paying attention to. I
encountered many different strategies for making money. To my surprise,
most traders were happy to talk about them, at least at a high level.
I came to regard finance practitioners as skilled specialists with detailed
domain knowledge, who were nonetheless far from rational in the way

economists use this term. A perfectly rational agent would be able to
exercise all possible strategies at once, whereas real traders are boundedly
rational, typically pursuing a single strategy, or a few at most. Standard
theoretical concepts like equilibrium and efficiency seemed of little use for
understanding what traders did, why they did it and how this affected
markets.
I turned instead to biology. The fact that investors are specialists makes
ecology the natural framework. Ecology provides a useful metaphor for
understanding specialized behavior in the economy in general, but for
financial markets I realized that it could be made mathematically precise
and used to explain many of the phenomena I observed. This provides a
deeper, more realistic understanding of how markets work and why they
sometimes don’t work. While I think ecology is a useful explanatory
principle for all of economics, financial markets provide a forum where it is
easy to make the ideas crisp and quantitative.
Let’s start with the big picture. To understand why ecosystems are the
way they are, and how they change through time, requires a theory of
evolution. The financial ecosystem satisfies the essential elements of the
theory of evolution, which Darwin called ‘descent with variation and
selection’. Here, descent means continuity across generations, variation
means offspring differ in some ways from their parents, and selection
means that only successful individuals survive and reproduce. Darwin and
Wallace showed that these three elements explain how new species emerge
and, over time, change the biosphere.
The same three essential elements characterize the agents and their
strategies in the financial system. There is descent because investors
develop their strategies by inheriting knowledge from their mentors, as well
as learning from their own prior experience. There is variation because
investors tinker with their strategies to improve them. There is selection
because strategies compete for profits; successful strategies accumulate
wealth and unsuccessful strategies go extinct.
Of course, there are important differences in the way organisms and
financial strategies evolve. Biological organisms interact by breeding,
eating one another, and reshaping their common environment, whereas
trading strategies interact via the market, reshaping patterns in the way
prices are formed as they eliminate and create market inefficiencies. The
distinctions among trading strategies are fuzzier than those among

biological species. Unlike biological organisms, which reproduce following
the fixed rules of biochemistry, financial strategies have no genetic code
and instead propagate via cultural transmission. People design strategies, so
their continual variation isn’t random; this accelerates the pace of evolution.
Selection in biology affects the population size of each species, whereas in
finance it affects the capital invested in each strategy, which I will call its
wealth.
Whether or not competition plays a fundamentally different role in
markets than it does in biology is a subject of debate. Competition is a core
assumption in financial economics, but mainstream economists reach
different conclusions about its consequences than biologists do. Economists
like Milton Friedman, who was Eugene Fama’s thesis advisor, used it to
shore up the efficient-markets hypothesis, arguing that competition should
quickly eliminate market inefficiencies. In contrast, Darwin and Wallace
used competition to explain why organisms specialize and how this creates
new species. Mainstream economists argue that competition leads to a state
of rest, whereas evolutionary biologists see it as the driver of perpetual
change.
Why did economists and biologists arrive at opposite views about the
role of competition? The key difference lies in their assumptions about the
reasoning power of agents. As noted, when Fama and Friedman postulated
efficient markets they also postulated rational agents – perfect problem-
solvers. If such rational agents really existed, the market would always be
calm and stable – 100 per cent efficient. But biological organisms are
agents who follow hardwired strategies that evolve through time to improve
their reproductive rates, in an environment that is perpetually subject to
change from both external and internal influences. Trees or bacteria behave
in a hardwired manner, whereas rational agents can solve any problem and
alter their strategies instantaneously.
People can indeed think, but their finite cognitive capacity places limits
on their successful strategizing. As discussed in Chapter 6, perfect
rationality provides a useful model for understanding human behavior when
the problems are sufficiently simple – options pricing or tic-tac-toe are
examples. But to explain market malfunctions, which generally occur in
complicated and unforeseen situations, specialization and bounded
rationality matter, and the basic principles of evolution and ecology provide
a better starting point than the efficient-markets hypothesis.

The proliferation of computerized trading strategies, like ours at
Prediction Company, underscores the bounded rationality of agents in the
market. While our strategies were constructed through a careful and
scientific search carried out by intelligent people, the final code that was
implemented to trade our strategies was very simple. It consisted of classic
stimulus/response instructions, of the form ‘If conditions A, B and C are
met, then buy (or sell) the following assets.’ Ants are far more intelligent
than our code was. It’s difficult to estimate precisely how much stock
trading is now done by computers, but most estimates put it well in excess
of 50 per cent. Computerized trading is far from rational, but it’s used in
many domains because it’s more successful than the trading done by human
beings, not to mention cheaper and quicker. If we were fully rational, we
would have foreseen the problems that program trading or mortgage-backed
securities would cause.1
The theory of market ecology
My musings about market anthropology and our experience measuring
market impact led me to a theory of market ecology.2 In my spare time at
Prediction Company I began scribbling and solving equations, which
eventually led to a paper titled ‘Market Force, Ecology and Evolution’,
which I finished and posted online in 1998. In a nutshell, the basic ideas are
that:
• Financial traders are boundedly rational, so they use specialized
strategies. Their strategies can be sorted into groups, like species in
biology, even if the boundary between groups can be fuzzy.
• Financial strategies feed off inefficiencies and interact through prices.
Trading has market impact, which changes prices and affects the
profits of each strategy.
• As a result, the wealth of each strategy evolves through time. As the
wealth invested in a strategy becomes larger, it has a bigger effect on
the market.
• This causes market inefficiencies to evolve through time. While
markets may tend toward an efficient state, the path there is bumpy, the
journey is slow and they never really reach their destination.

• If a destabilizing strategy becomes too dominant, it can unsettle the
market and cause it to malfunction. To understand why markets
malfunction we need to classify financial strategies, understand how
they affect the market and track their evolution through time.
Let’s now explore this in more depth.
The diverse anthropology of traders reflects the diversity of their
specialized strategies, which have names like trend following, technical
trading, value investing, index arbitrage, market making, derivative trading
and so on. Small firms typically only do one of these; big firms may do
many, but with an aggregation of specialized groups, who may have little
interaction with each other.
To a trader, the word inefficiency is just a fancy name for a pattern in
prices that can be exploited to make profits. The ultimate origin of
inefficiencies is economic activity, such as raising capital and offloading
risks, but, just as in biological ecosystems, strategies also exploit the
inefficiencies created by other strategies. Financial strategies take
advantage of these inefficiencies, but, in doing so, alter the market and
create new inefficiencies, and in some cases cause market malfunctions.
For example, a feature of economic activity that creates inefficiencies is
its persistence. Successful companies have momentum, meaning if they are
growing rapidly they are likely to continue growing rapidly, at least for a
while. This makes price changes persistent, creating a niche for trend-
following strategies, which buy when markets are rising and sell when
markets are falling. This can be profitable, but it can also drive prices away
from fundamental values. Trend strategies are destabilizing, so much so that
if there are only trend strategies in the market, prices blow up (head for
infinity).3 Trend strategies can play a major role in fueling bubbles, such as
the dot-com bubble which peaked in early 2000. Stock prices in the Nasdaq
index went from under 1,000 in 1995 to a peak of 5,048 on March 10, 2000,
and then dropped to 1,114 on October 9, 2002. The huge swings in stock
market value had important economic consequences: At the peak of the
bubble, it was easy to get almost any new, or not-so-new, internet-related
idea funded. After the bubble popped, it became difficult to get even really
good ideas funded, and the pensions of many people who had the
misfortune to invest in tech stocks just before the bubble popped were
demolished. This is a great example of how imbalances in the market

ecology – in this case overpopulation of destabilizing strategies – can make
markets malfunction.
Eugene Fama initially resisted the idea that trend following could be
profitable, because it seemed irrational, but he and his collaborator Kenneth
French eventually looked at the data and realized that it could be
surprisingly profitable.4 This contradicted efficient-markets theory, but they
fixed this by moving the goalposts, incorporating such profits into their
benchmark for efficiency instead of calling them excess profits.
Strategies affect each other’s profits via their market impact on prices,
and thinking in ecological terms can help understand their interaction. For
example, trend strategies can range from short-term strategies that buy
when prices go up for a short period of time (say a week) to those that only
react after much longer periods of time (say a year). Suppose the market
happens to have a good week, for whatever reason. As a result, the short-
term trend strategies buy. This drives prices up further, causing slightly
longer-term trend strategies to buy, causing prices to go up more, and so on,
until finally after a year the price has risen substantially and all the trend
followers have bought the asset. The price will eventually drop, generating
a wave of selling as all the trend followers unwind their positions.
This self-fulfilling dynamic is good for the short-term trend strategies
but bad for long-term trend strategies (whose profits are diminished by the
presence of the short-term strategies). To put this in ecological terms, short-
term strategies have a predator–prey relationship with long-term strategies.
An ecological analog might be rabbits and foxes: An increase in the rabbit
population causes the fox population to grow, and an increase in the fox
population causes the number of rabbits to drop. Similarly, an increase in
the wealth of long-term trend followers causes the returns of short-term
trend followers to grow, but an increase in the wealth of short-term trend
followers causes the returns of long-term trend followers to drop.
The possible relationships between trading strategies can be classified
using biological nomenclature, by applying ‘what-if’ experiments. What if
the wealth of strategy A increases? How does that affect the returns of
strategy B? Similarly, if the wealth of strategy B increases, how does this
affect the returns of strategy A? If both of their returns decrease when the
wealth of the other strategy increases, then they have a competitive
relationship. If A’s returns go up when B’s wealth goes up, but B’s returns
go down when A’s wealth goes up, then they have a predator–prey

relationship, in which A is the predator and B is the prey. If both of their
returns increase when the other’s wealth goes up, then they have a
mutualistic relationship. An important case is when A = B. The wealth of a
strategy strongly affects its own returns as well: The laws of supply and
demand imply that, absent market manipulation, the returns of a strategy
will decrease as its wealth increases, so strategies automatically compete
with themselves.5 Sometimes two strategies simply don’t interact, so that a
change in the wealth of strategy A has no effect on the returns of strategy B.
But because trading affects prices, and almost all strategies are price-
dependent, many if not most strategies interact.
In my market-ecology paper, these ideas allowed me to derive a set of
equations describing how the wealth of strategies changes based on their
ecological interactions. My equations are similar to the most famous
equations in ecology – the Lotka-Volterra equations, named in honor of the
American mathematician Alfred J. Lotka and the Italian mathematician Vito
Volterra, who first wrote them down in the early twentieth century.6 The
Lotka-Volterra equations showed that predator–prey systems could behave
in a surprising way. Independently, they showed that under certain
circumstances the populations of rabbits and foxes could oscillate
indefinitely. The equations are only an approximation – nothing ever
happens truly indefinitely – but there are many examples in real ecosystems
where populations of predators and prey markedly fluctuate over long
periods of time, without any obvious external stimulus. (In fact, more
realistic generalizations of the Lotka-Volterra equations often display
chaotic oscillations.)
My equations are a general version of the Lotka-Volterra equations, but
with the population of species replaced by the wealth of strategies. As in
their equations, there are some situations where the wealth of all the
strategies settles down to a constant value, approaching a fixed-point
attractor, and other situations where they oscillate indefinitely. So, for
example, the population of trend followers may go up while the population
of value investors goes down, and then the opposite happens. So far we lack
data to properly fit these equations to financial markets, and my derivation
relies on approximations that may not always be valid. At this point, it
remains to be seen whether sustained oscillations ever occur in practice, but
the theory makes the correspondence to biological populations tangible.

I submitted ‘Market Force, Ecology and Evolution’ to one of the more
avant-garde economics journals, but the referees didn’t really understand it
and, in the end, they wanted to publish only the first half, dropping the
discussion of evolution and much of the ecology. The resulting published
paper, which was co-authored with my research assistant Shareen Joshi,
gave only part of the story.7 I despaired of ever publishing the full paper
until several years later I happened to meet Giovanni Dosi, a radical Italian
economist who has developed and promoted evolutionary ideas in
economics, and who is the head of one of the world’s largest complexity-
economics groups, based in Pisa, Italy.8 Despite working well outside of
mainstream economics, Giovanni was then editor-in-chief of the Oxford
journal Industrial and Corporate Change; he liked my paper and published
it there. It caught the attention of Andrew Lo of MIT, a prominent financial
economist and an original thinker who manages to be a member of the
mainstream while also advocating ideas that are off the beaten path. Like
me, he felt that economics could benefit from borrowing more ideas from
biology, and our discussions resulted in a joint paper called ‘Frontiers of
Finance: Evolution and Efficient Markets’, published in 1999 in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.9 Andrew went on to
develop what he calls the adaptive-markets hypothesis, which embraces
market ecology and evolution but also introduces other interesting ideas
from biology, artificial intelligence and the cognitive neurosciences.10
While ‘Market Force, Ecology and Evolution’ attracted interest from
econophysicists, complexity economists and a few open-minded
mainstream economists like Andy, it was otherwise ignored. I realized that
the only way to make mainstream economists pay attention to theories that
run counter to the accepted canon is by showing that they lead to superior
empirical predictions – and, even then, the evidence needs to be so
overwhelming that it cannot be ignored.
Can market ecology predict market malfunction?
In order to study market ecosystems empirically, I needed access to special
data. There is plenty of data available about market transactions, but it lacks
counterparty identifiers – a record of who transacted with whom. Without
counterparty identifiers, I was like an ecologist whose data say ‘some
animal ate another animal’, without naming the species involved. Most

regulators have this kind of data, but, despite several attempts, I never
managed to get any of them to share it with me. Without it, I couldn’t see
how to empirically show that the underlying ideas of market ecology were
useful. Since I couldn’t find the data I needed, I suspended my research on
market ecology.
Then, twenty years later, in 2018, I attended a conference organized by
Andy Lo and Simon Levin on applications of concepts from biology to
economics.11 Simon is a professor of ecology at Princeton, and a fellow
member of SFI’s external faculty, who has collaborated with Andy on some
of his ideas about adaptive markets. The meeting brought together a diverse
group of interdisciplinary thinkers, including economists who thought in
biological terms and biologists who were interested in economics. This
rekindled my interest, spurring me to do some new work – an opportunity
that fortunately coincided with the interests of my Dutch graduate student,
Maarten Scholl. Maarten had been admitted into the Computer Science
Department at Oxford, and he was looking for a project. I realized that my
earlier paper had left many theoretical questions unanswered, so Maarten
and I began working on market ecology, along with his other thesis advisor,
Ani Calinescu.
Maarten built a ‘laboratory’ consisting of a computer simulation of an
idealized stock market. The set-up was similar to the Santa Fe Artificial
Stock Market, but it was simpler, and we had a different goal. Our purpose
was not to make a realistic simulation of a market but rather to use the
theoretical framework of ecology to better understand how deviations from
market efficiency evolve through time, in a transparent setting where we
could see exactly what caused what. In our market, there was a single stock
paying a randomly varying dividend and a bond paying a fixed interest rate.
There were three trading strategies – a value investor, a trend follower, and
a ‘noise trader’ who represented a nonprofessional investor making mostly
random decisions. Each of the strategies was initially endowed with wealth,
consisting of shares of the stock and the bond; as they traded them through
time, their wealth evolved in proportion to their profits and losses. While
the wealths of the three strategies tended to adjust so that the market
became somewhat more efficient, it did so slowly and with considerable
uncertainty. Even when we waited for simulated centuries, there were still
substantial fluctuations in the wealths of the strategies, corresponding to
deviations from perfect efficiency.

We used our laboratory to show explicitly how it is possible to apply
concepts from ecology to understand markets.12 We classified the pairwise
relationships between the strategies as competitive, predator–prey and
mutualistic, and showed how these relationships could change with the
changing wealth of the strategies.13 As expected, the trend follower and the
value investor tended to prey on the noise trader, but this was not always
true, and we even observed mutualistic relationships.14 We mapped out the
‘food web’ of our financial system, demonstrating how the strategies utilize
inefficiencies to maintain their wealth, and how they create inefficiencies
that support one another.
We wanted to demonstrate how the theory of market ecology can predict
market malfunctions. By malfunctions, we meant deviations of the prices of
assets from their true value or volatility of prices in excess of what should
occur based on external information (as discussed in Chapter 9). Because
trend-following strategies are inherently destabilizing, we expected that
when that strategy has more wealth than the other two, we would see larger
mispricings and more volatility. This intuition was borne out: The changes
in the wealth of the strategies were highly predictive of both mispricings
and volatility.
But is there solid, empirical evidence that market ecology is useful?
Over the last two years, with a little help from Maarten, my persistent and
creative French mathematics student Aymeric Vie has developed an
empirically-grounded simulation of the US stock market that demonstrates
that the answer to this question is ‘yes!’. The simulation makes use of
regulatory filings by mutual funds, who are required to submit their
positions to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) every quarter.
This makes it possible to back-out crude approximations of the strategies of
long-term investors, who hold their positions for more than three months.
Aymeric explicitly simulates the trading of thousands of mutual funds:
Every quarter his simulation is initialized with the actual holdings of the
funds. It then simulates their trading and predicts how it will affect next
quarter’s prices. He has shown that his simulation has predictive power
above and beyond fundamentals alone. (Fundamentals refers to information
that affects the price for economic reasons, such as earnings and dividends.)
This shows that the market is not perfectly efficient: The type of funds that
are active at any point in time affects prices. Market ecology has predictive
power.

Regulatory implications of market ecology
Maarten and Aymeric’s work provides a proof of principle for a new, more
effective way to regulate markets. Regulators such as the SEC, who have
access to much better data, could use our methods to simulate markets,
monitor their stability and intervene when they are in danger of serious
disruption. Such a simulation could also provide a testing ground for new
financial instruments.
One of the challenges in ecology is understanding what happens to an
ecosystem when a new species is introduced or an existing species is
removed. For example, the widespread hunting of beavers for their pelts in
America in the nineteenth century had a host of negative side-effects.
Beavers eat young trees and thereby create meadows; their ponds raise the
water table and provide essential habitat for many plants and animals.
Another famous case is the introduction of rabbits into Australia in 1859.
Rabbits have no natural predators in Australia, and, by 1920, there were
roughly 10 billion of them.15 Rabbits eat tree seedlings, denude vegetation
and have contributed to the loss of a vast number of native Australian
species. To control their population, other non-native species, such as foxes
and cats, were introduced, but these preyed on other small animals as well
and have caused even more environmental damage.
In the United States, major projects require environmentalimpact
statements that analyze ecological effects. But there is no equivalent impact
statement for a new type of derivative or financial exchange – at least in
part because the belief in efficient markets has suppressed development of
the science necessary to do this. There are many clear instances where
changes in market structure or the introduction of new financial instruments
caused serious problems. As noted, the introduction of portfolio insurance
fueled the 1987 stock market crash, and the introduction of mortgage-
backed securities was a primary cause of the financial crisis of 2008. To
understand the likely effect of future financial innovations, regulators could
make old data with counterparty identifiers available to researchers, who
could then develop quantitative agent-based models of financial markets
and use them to test market innovations for possible adverse side-effects.
We could also monitor the financial ecosystem in real time to anticipate
problems and intervene when necessary.

An agent-based model built for the Nasdaq stock exchange is proof that
this can work.16 Prior to 1997, US stock prices were traded in increments of
an eighth of a dollar. Then, American stock exchanges were ordered by the
SEC to begin trading in increments of a penny, a process called
decimalization. To try to understand any possible adverse side-effects,
Nasdaq hired the BiosGroup, a consulting company of complex-systems
scientists founded by Stuart Kauffman. In an effort led by the complex-
systems scientist Vince Darley, the BiosGroup built an agent-based model
for trading on the Nasdaq. The agents in the model were traders who
followed specific strategies. The role of market-makers was particularly
important. The model made six predictions, five of which were borne out
when the change to decimalization was actually made. (For example, it
correctly predicted that spreads would narrow, and that the depth of the
market – that is, the size of the trades it could absorb without affecting
prices – would drop as well.)
Several regulatory institutions, such as the Bank of England and the
European Central Bank, are beginning to collect the necessary detailed data,
and to monitor the balance sheets of major banks and other important
financial institutions. Some of them are also beginning to build agent-based
models that can use this data, though none of these efforts is properly
funded. We’ll say more about this in the next chapter when we discuss the
destabilizing effects of leverage.
The market mass-extinction of August 2007
Convergent evolution is another concept from ecology that is useful for
understanding markets. There are many species which, despite having very
different ancestry to one another, evolve to inhabit the same niche and
perform similar functions. For example, hummingbirds and hawk moths
both hover in the air with their wings beating rapidly while extracting
nectar from flowers. They can be hard to tell apart from a distance, but up
close they look completely different, which is not surprising given that their
last common ancestor lived hundreds of millions of years ago.
Convergent evolution also happens in financial markets. Even without
any contact, people with similar training often find similar solutions to the
same problems. Prediction Company was what is known as a statistical
arbitrage (or stat-arb) fund. As a result of convergent evolution, Prediction

Company’s performance in the late 1990s became closely correlated with
that of other stat-arb funds; our niche became more crowded. As in
biological overpopulation, this was inimical to survival. To illustrate the
effects of overcrowding: One of our main competitors was an investment-
management firm called D. E. Shaw, which allied with Bank of America in
1997. An unrelated problem at Bank of America forced D. E. Shaw to
temporarily shut down its stat-arb fund. In the nine months or so that D. E.
Shaw halted its trading, we made profits at a rate much higher than normal.
As soon as they began trading again, this stopped. This was because, in
ecological terms, we were competitors, occupying the same niche; our
trades were similar to theirs, and we had common market impact, which
lowered both of our returns.
While there were only a handful of stat-arb funds in the mid- 1990s, by
2007 there were hundreds, most of them trading as much capital as they
possibly could. In August 2007, after I had left Prediction Company, I got a
call from Karen Lawrence, CEO of Prediction Company and a close friend.
She asked if I had heard about anything unusual going on in the markets.
Prediction Company was having a strange problem: It had taken substantial
losses for several days in a row, even though the market was otherwise
normal and there was nothing in the news. Almost all of the stocks
Prediction Company owned went down, and almost all of the stocks it had
short positions in went up. Though none of the individual losses were large,
Prediction Company was taking systematic losses on almost all of its 1,000
or so positions. This had never happened to statistical arbitrage firms
before, even if there were antecedents in other markets.17 Company
researchers concluded that the only possible cause was that other stat-arb
funds were liquidating their positions.
It turned out that Prediction Company was right. The trigger was a
prominent investment bank with large positions in mortgage-backed
securities. As bad news emerged about housing markets, the investment
bank needed to raise cash to cover its anticipated losses. To do so, the
bank’s managers decided to liquidate the positions of their large stat-arb
fund in order to free up capital for the rest of the bank. To reduce market
impact, such liquidations are spread out over time, and can take weeks. The
persistent pressure on prices caused other stat-arb funds, who all had similar
positions, to take losses, and, once these were sufficiently large, they were
forced to liquidate as well. This set off what came to be known as the ‘quant

meltdown’, in which the market impact of liquidations systematically
pushed prices in the wrong direction. Prediction Company was confident
that, as soon as everyone stopped liquidating, profits would bounce back –
and so they did. The profits of the few survivors soared.18
There were several surprising things about the quant meltdown. First, it
was not obvious beforehand that a niche could get so crowded that the
simple act of a large player liquidating its position could bring the whole
sector down, causing a mass extinction.19 We now understand that this is
partly a consequence of the fact that stat-arb funds use leverage, which we
will examine in Chapter 11. Second, the trigger that brought them down
came from mortgage-backed securities, which are unrelated to any of the
assets traded by stat-arb funds. But the fact that several large investment
banks with stat-arb funds also held mortgage-backed securities created a
link between the two.
The quant meltdown was a disaster, but at least it was self-contained. If
you weren’t investing in stat-arb funds, you likely didn’t even notice it.
Nonetheless, it was a harbinger of far worse things to come. Less than a
year later, the link between mortgage-backed securities and lending in
general severely stressed the world’s financial system and caused a major
recession. If the regulators had been monitoring markets by running agent-
based models that could warn of systemic risk, they might have acted
sooner to avert or dampen the financial crisis of 2008. We’ll investigate this
further in the next chapter.
...
