11.
How Credit Causes Financial
Turbulence
The most recent global financial crisis reminded the current generation of
the lessons that their grandparents had learned in the Great Depression:
The self-regulating economy does not always work as well as its proponents
would like us to believe.
Joseph Stiglitz1
Credit, leverage and financial crises
Providing credit, including loans, mortgages, bonds and credit cards, is one
of the most important functions of the financial system. The details of
contracts for offering credit vary, but the basic mechanism is the same: A
lender temporarily provides money to a borrower. Credit is essential for the
operation of the economy – people need it to buy houses, businesses need it
to expand their operations – but it also introduces risks.
Credit connects us together by linking the balance sheets of borrowers
and lenders. Contracts for the provision of credit form a vast network, with
balance sheets as nodes, and links from lender to borrower. Borrowers often
use more than one source of credit, lenders supply money to multiple
borrowers, and the same agent can simultaneously both lend and borrow.
The network of credit contracts is an important subset of the web of
contracts. The credit network is also closely coupled with the rest of the
economy. If the economy goes into a depression and you lose your job, you
may be unable to repay your loans; if businesses can’t get credit, GDP
suffers. Upheavals in the credit network are the main cause of recessions.2
The overextension of credit was a major cause of the 2008 financial
crisis.3 When credit is used to buy assets, it’s called leverage. Buying assets

with borrowed money may sound imprudent, but people do it all the time.
Suppose you want to buy a home for $500,000 but you can’t pay the full
price in cash. You take out a mortgage, putting 20 per cent down and
borrowing $400,000 from the bank. Leverage is defined as the ratio of
assets to equity. Thus, your leverage is now 5:1, since the value of the house
(the asset) is five times the value of your equity (the 20 per cent down
payment).4
The term leverage comes from a mechanical analogy to a lever. Just as a
lever lets you apply a larger force than your limited strength allows,
borrowing lets you buy more than your current assets permit. Most of us
couldn’t buy a home without leverage. It is essential for businesses, which
often need more resources than they can marshal with their own capital. But
unlike mechanical leverage, which amplifies force in a straightforward way,
financial leverage does more than just amplify profits and losses – it creates
risk and can destabilize markets.
Leverage can be risky for both borrower and lender. Suppose that
immediately after you buy your house for $500,000, its value drops by 10
per cent. You still owe the bank $400,000, but your house is now worth
only $450,000. Your equity in the house is now $50,000, which means your
leverage has increased to 450/50 = 9, nearly double what it was before. If
the value of the house declines by another 10 per cent of the original price,
to $400,000, your equity goes down to zero and your leverage becomes
infinite. This is a good example of nonlinearity: The second 10 per cent
drop drives leverage up infinitely more than the first. We will see later in
this chapter how the strongly nonlinear nature of leverage is a powerful
amplifier that can cause booms and busts in the economy.
Credit causes risk. To mitigate risk, lenders usually require collateral,
which in the case of a mortgage is usually the house itself. As a result, when
the value of your house drops, your loan becomes riskier for the lender.
When many types of financial assets, such as stocks or mortgage-backed
securities, are purchased using credit, to mitigate the cost of a potential
default, the lender usually requires partial repayment of the loan if the
leverage exceeds a certain threshold. In the financial world this is called a
margin call. One way to raise cash to meet a margin call is to sell some of
the asset. But if many investors do this, when asset prices drop, everyone
sells at the same time, lowering prices, which triggers even more margin
calls and more selling, creating a feedback loop that amplifies bad news. As

we’ll see, sufficiently high leverage can cause bubbles and crashes to occur
spontaneously for what might seem like no reason at all.
Margin calls lower the risk for an individual lender acting alone, but they
increase systemic risk. In principle, it seems prudent for the lender to
require a margin call; if only a few investors are using leverage, this helps
protect the lender against default. But when too many investors use
leverage, the collective effect of their actions can lead them all to default at
the same time, causing prices to drop and thereby increasing the risk to the
lender. Striking the right balance between individual risk and systemic risk
is a key challenge for regulators. As we will discuss at the end of the
chapter, some of the more progressive central banks are developing
complexity-economics models to better understand how to design
regulatory frameworks that take systemic risk into account.
In books and papers published in the 1970s, the Washington University
Marxist economist Hyman Minsky postulated that, when markets are calm,
competition drives investors to take on more leverage to increase their
profits, which can cause a crash when conditions change. Minsky’s
arguments were not expressed in mathematical terms, and they ran counter
to prevailing views about market efficiency, so they were largely ignored at
the time. They proved to be prescient for the 2008 financial crisis, when
Minsky’s work suddenly became very relevant.
I learned a lot about leverage from my friend John Geanakoplos, whose
pioneering work on leverage cycles shows how real-world experience can
drive scientific discovery. John was a professor at Yale, but he was also a
financial practitioner. His cousin, Mike Vranos, was Wall Street’s leading
mortgage-backed securities trader at a now defunct firm called Kidder-
Peabody. He arranged for John to join the firm as head of fixed-income
research, where John invented new mathematical methods for pricing
mortgage-backed securities. When Kidder folded (for unrelated reasons),
Mike and John and four of their colleagues started Ellington Management
Group, which quickly became the leading mortgage-backed-securities
hedge fund.
John’s model for leverage was inspired by the near meltdown of the
global financial system in 1998 because of the use of excessive leverage by
a high-flying hedge fund called Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM),
which was started by John Meriweather. LTCM’s board of directors
included Myron Scholes and Robert Merton, both Nobel laureates for their

work in finance. From its founding in 1994, through 1997, LTCM made
remarkable returns that for two years exceeded 40 per cent. This was
possible only because of their very high leverage. By 1998, they had $4.7
billion under management, but the size of their loan was an astounding
$125 billion, meaning their leverage was about 25:1. To put this in
perspective, with this much leverage it takes a loss of only 4 per cent (in
their case $4.7 billion) to go bankrupt.
Their core strategy was a type of statistical arbitrage called convergence
trading, which involves making bets on the spreads between interest rates
on bonds, for example, by buying British bonds and selling American
bonds. Their strategy was predicated on two assumptions: First, when
differences in interest rates widen, they will eventually return. LTCM
searched for pairs of bonds whose spreads were wider than their historical
average. They would then buy the bond with the lower interest rate and
short the bond with the higher interest rate (thereby betting that its price
would come down), in order to make a profit when the interest rates
eventually returned to normal. Their second assumption was that spreads
between different bonds behave independently of each other.
Both of these assumptions unraveled in 1998. The problems began with
the Asian financial crisis in 1997. Thailand, which had a booming economy
and significant foreign debt, was forced to stop pegging its currency to the
dollar, after which the Thai baht lost half its value, and the increase in
foreign debt left Thailand bankrupt. The ensuing panic affected all of
Southeast Asia, causing investors to lose faith in investing in developing
countries, which in turn resulted in an economic slowdown throughout the
developing world. It may also have contributed to the plummeting price of
oil, which declined to what was then an historical low of $11 per barrel in
November 1998. In the run-up to this, Russia defaulted on its bonds. The
global investment community became nervous that more such problems
might follow, causing a ‘flight to quality’ as investors rapidly moved their
capital from risky bonds to safer bonds.
This caused many of LTCM’s positions to go bad at the same time. Safe
bonds pay lower interest rates than risky bonds, so LTCM’s convergence
strategy meant that across the board it was long on low, safer interest rates
and short on high, riskier interest rates. The flight to quality drove the
interest rates of safe bonds even lower and the interest rates of risky bonds
even higher, so LTCM lost money across the board. The fact that LTCM

had become so huge and so leveraged caused both of the assumptions
underlying their strategy to be violated. As problems mounted, they made
the problem even worse: when spreads widened, to make their margin calls
they needed to unwind their positions; but as they did so, their market
impact made the spreads even wider. Because they were invested globally,
this happened everywhere, causing spreads throughout the world to widen
in tandem.
LTCM lost $5 billion – the fund’s entire net worth – in only four months.
Investors panicked: If the fund was forced to liquidate quickly, it would buy
safe bonds and sell risky bonds, and spreads would widen even more.5
Virtually every major investment bank on Wall Street had money invested
with LTCM, and many had made huge convergence bets of their own, so a
rapid liquidation could have pulled down the entire global financial system.
The Federal Reserve stepped in and organized a bailout, whereby LTCM’s
major investors were pressured into purchasing it and winding it down
slowly. As in the 2007 quant meltdown, this illustrates the importance of
understanding market ecology, and is a good example of how leverage leads
to systemic risk.
John’s firm, Ellington, also used leverage, but at reasonable levels:
Where LTCM’s leverage was an astronomical 25, Ellington’s was only
about 5. Ellington traded mortgage-backed securities, not bonds, and they
were unaffected by the LTCM meltdown. However, one of Ellington’s
prime brokers got nervous and suddenly asked for a margin call – an
immediate repayment of the loan providing the leverage – allowing only
one day for repayment. Ellington saved the firm and its investors with
frantic trading and has used lower leverage since then. Perhaps even more
important, they changed their contracts so that their lenders need to give six
months prior notice before changing Ellington’s margins. This solved the
real problem that had caused the margin call: Despite the fact that there
were no problems with Ellington’s positions in the market, increasing
nervousness led the lenders to demand more collateral (forcing Ellington to
sell assets).
Inspired by these events, John quickly developed a theory for how
leverage causes booms and busts. He did this in 2000, eight years before the
2008 financial crisis.6 Whereas Minsky simply presented the idea that
waves of investor pessimism and optimism could influence borrowing and
possibly cause a crash, John’s mathematical theory linked uncertainty,

leverage and asset prices, and incorporated the important role of collateral.
(John was unaware of Minsky.)
To put this in context, there is a highly influential theorem by Franco
Modigliani and Merton Miller which suggests that leverage shouldn’t affect
prices. Their theorem, formulated in 1958, is a classic result in economics,
and says that the enterprise value of a firm should be unaffected by how it is
financed. Enterprise value is a measure of fundamental value, not market
price, and their theorem involves a long list of strong assumptions,
including efficient markets, but it was widely interpreted to mean that
leverage shouldn’t affect prices.7 The LTCM saga and Ellington’s
experience made it clear that leverage could have a big effect on prices.
John designed a model to show how leverage can distort prices. His
model is an equilibrium model with rational, profit-maximizing agents who
trade an asset (like a stock or bond). The model is formulated in a three-step
process; in between each step, information is revealed that can be ‘good’ or
‘bad’. There is a continuum of different agents, ranging from ‘optimists’,
who have a prior belief that good information is more likely, to ‘pessimists’,
who have a prior belief that bad information is more likely. Crucially, the
agents are allowed to lend to each other.
In the first period, the model assumes markets are calm (meaning asset
price volatility is low). The optimists borrow from the pessimists and buy as
much of the asset as they can, pushing up its price.8 If good news is
received, this situation persists, but if bad news is received, the price drops.
One expects the price to drop due to bad news, but the leverage amplifies
the drop for two reasons: First, the leveraged optimists lose more money
from the initial price drop than the unleveraged pessimists. This decreases
the optimists’ influence on the market, giving the pessimists a bigger role in
setting prices, and forcing the asset price down. Second, and even more
important, the uncertainty created by the news makes the lenders nervous,
so they are not willing to lend as much. They lower the allowed leverage,
forcing a margin call and preventing new buyers from borrowing nearly as
much as the original buyers did to prop up the price. If bad news is received
twice in a row, this causes the market to crash. John showed that the rise
and fall in price goes hand in hand with the rise and fall in leverage, which
in turn goes hand in hand with the fall and rise in uncertainty, in a process
he called the leverage cycle. This demonstration of the dangers of leverage

contradicted the prevailing wisdom at the time, but unfortunately the lesson
was not absorbed in the build-up to the 2008 financial crisis.
On a broader level, John’s theory of the leverage cycle provides a great
example of how institutional structure can cause market inefficiency, even
with rational agents. If the agents were not allowed to lend, prices would
match fundamental values. The combination of heterogeneous expectations
and lending drives profits up, while pushing prices away from their
fundamental value. Even if the market is informationally efficient (it is not
possible for anyone to make excess profits), it can be far from allocational
efficiency. This is not a tiny effect – as we saw in 2008, it can be a huge
effect.
Leverage causes the market to make its own news
One summer day in 2003, a young professor from Vienna named Stefan
Thurner knocked on the door of my office at the Santa Fe Institute. Stefan
had abandoned a career as a clarinet player for particle physics. Then,
toward the end of graduate school, he decided that particle physics was
stuck and got his PhD in finance instead. He subsequently started the
Complexity Science Hub in Vienna, which is now probably the second-
largest complex-systems research center in the world (after the Santa Fe
Institute).
Stefan wanted to make a financial model and asked me if I had any
ideas. I had first heard about John’s theory of the leverage cycle at a talk he
gave at SFI in 2001, and had been keen since then to make an agent-based
model of the leverage cycle, so I suggested this as a good topic. We began a
project that we would work on for a few weeks each summer when Stefan
visited SFI, and during a long sailing trip we made in my boat,
Eudaemonia, from Jacksonville, Florida, to Nassau, in the Bahamas. Since
John G. was the inventor of leverage cycles and often visited SFI in the
summer, as well as being a good friend, we pulled him into the
collaboration.9
Stefan began programming a simple agent-based model. The idea was to
do a complexity-economics version of John’s three-period equilibrium
model to see what it would tell us. John had kept his model simple, so that
he could solve it with pencil and paper. We wanted, instead, to make an

agent-based model to study the dynamics of leverage cycles in an open-
ended and more realistic manner.
As in many earlier agent-based models (see Chapter 9), traders had a
choice between a stock and a bond. But, unlike in those models, the traders
used leverage, and we only had value investors; there were no trend
followers. As in John’s model, the value investors varied in their level of
aggression (which had the same net effect as varying levels of optimism).
The most aggressive funds bought the asset as soon as it was underpriced,
whereas the less aggressive funds waited for more substantial mispricings.
There were some other differences, but they’re not important here. What
distinguished our model from earlier agent-based models of financial
markets was the use of leverage.10 Our model contained a bank that could
lend to the funds, but, as in real markets, there was a cap on leverage. If the
leverage exceeded the cap, the funds were required to make a margin call
and partially repay their loan to bring the leverage back under their limit.
We worked mainly in the summer, during Stefan’s annual visits, so it
took several years and quite a bit of trial and error to fully develop the
model. When the 2008 financial crisis began, we realized that our model
was relevant to current events, and we kicked into gear, got the code
working and produced some results. We had set things up so that we could
turn the leverage up or down. Without leverage, the market behaved as one
would expect under rational expectations. The price fluctuated, but
remained close to the fundamental value. There was no clustered volatility,
and no one ever defaulted. Even in runs spanning centuries of simulated
time, the largest losses were less than 10 per cent.
However, as soon as we let the funds use leverage, everything changed.
As we began raising the leverage limit, clustered volatility and fat tails
appeared and grew stronger. There were periods when the market was
reasonably efficient; using leverage, the funds could make bigger bets,
which kept the price close to fundamental values. But, from time to time,
there would be a crash, triggering a volatile period in which the market was
inefficient and prices strayed significantly from fundamental values. The
crashes could be very large, sometimes generating losses as high as 40 per
cent, and many of the funds would default.11
The crashes were caused by margin calls. When at least one fund
exceeded its leverage limit, generating the margin call, it depressed the
price of the asset even further. This raised the leverage even more, requiring

another margin call and causing other funds to make margin calls, and so
on. The net result was that a little bad news could be enormously amplified
by the market.
We weren’t too surprised by the big crashes; this is what we had been
expecting. In John’s model, leverage cycles were implicitly viewed as rare
events that resulted in large crashes. In ours, however, there were ‘crashes’
of all sizes, from frequent small price adjustments to rarer, large events.
Furthermore, there were long calm periods punctuated by turbulent periods
– in other words, clustered volatility. This, in turn, caused fat tails in price
changes, matching real markets surprisingly well.
Our model showed that there are at least two possible causes of clustered
volatility in financial markets. One cause is trend following, as in the Santa
Fe Artificial Stock Market or the Brock and Hommes model described in
Chapter 9, and the other is the excessive use of leverage, as in our model.
Usually, both are active at once, but in extreme circumstances one cause or
the other can dominate. The dot-com bubble was a quintessential case of a
crash caused by trend following, and the big decline in stock market prices
during the crisis of 2007–2008 was a classic example of a crash caused by
excessive leverage.12
Upon reflection, these two mechanisms are more similar than they might
appear. Both trend following and margin calls cause inverted demand
functions. As noted, normally demand goes up as the price goes down and
supply goes down as the price goes down; this makes the market stable.
But, when there are trend followers or when there is a margin call, demand
goes down as the price goes down. This causes selling into falling markets,
which makes the market unstable, driving prices away from fundamental
values, or in other words, causing the market to malfunction.
Given our model’s simplicity, its volatility dynamics were surprisingly
realistic. Volatility in real markets follows a characteristic asymmetric
pattern, consisting of sharp upward spikes followed by slow decay. Our
model does something very similar, whereas standard mainstream models
of volatility have much more symmetric profiles. Our model gave a good
quantitative match to the empirical volatility profile.
One of the great values of agent-based models is that they can easily be
used to test different policies. We brought in Stefan’s graduate student
Sebastian Poledna as a collaborator, extended the model slightly to make it
more realistic, and compared three different policies for risk control. Our

baseline policy assumed a constant leverage cap, as described above. We
also tested two other more sophisticated, supposedly superior policies, one
in which the leverage cap depends on the recent volatility of markets (when
volatility goes down, the leverage cap goes up, and vice versa) and another
where banks require borrowers to buy options to offset the risk of possible
defaults. We tested all three policies under comparable circumstances,
counting the frequency of defaults under each policy.13
With low leverage caps, both of the more sophisticated risk policies were
successful in reducing the frequency of defaults. But with higher leverage
caps, the opposite happened: The sophisticated policies made things worse,
because they caused the effective leverage cap to change based on recent
volatility. If volatility increased, leverage caps went down. This caused
even more selling into falling markets, amplifying downward price
movements, increasing volatility, lowering leverage even more, causing
more selling and so forth. As a result, there were crashes that would not
have occurred under the simple policy where the required leverage remains
constant.
Let’s reflect for a moment on how our agent-based model for leverage
differs from a standard mainstream model. We determine prices in our
model by matching supply and demand, so we do use the equilibrium
assumption. But, in all other respects, this differs from a mainstream model.
Our agents don’t maximize utility. Instead, they buy or sell according to
simple heuristics that approximate what fundamental investors actually do:
buy underpriced assets and sell them later. This behavior is directly
observable, and is unlikely to change in light of new policies. Our investors
are boundedly rational, which means their views are occasionally wrong.
This is why prices can deviate substantially from fundamental values and
why the market crashes. It is why the market is inefficient.
Our model illustrates the paradox of systemic risk. If only one small
fund uses leverage, its effect on the market is small, and margin calls
protect the lender by making sure that the leverage never goes too high. But
if many funds use leverage, margin calls have a systemic effect on the
market, increasing the risk of default and hurting the lender as well as the
borrower. Systemic risk presents a major challenge to regulators because,
by its very nature, it is an emergent property, dependent on the interactions
of many different actors. This means that it cannot be understood by
looking at each agent one at a time – it is essential to understand the

behavior of the system as a whole. Agent-based models make it easier to
understand systemic risk and test policies to control it.
The financial crisis of 2008
Leverage played a central role in the financial crisis of 2008. Here are the
highlights: The invention of a new type of financial instrument, mortgage-
backed securities, allowed banks to bundle mortgages into standardized
packages, to be bought and sold. This allowed banks to offload their risk to
bigger institutions with more risk-bearing capacity. This seemed like a good
thing for everyone: It was good for banks because it lowered their risk,
allowing them to offer more generous mortgages, and good for low-income
home buyers, because it allowed them to own homes and profit from the
expected rise in prices. It also seemed good for the big financial institutions
that bore the risk, because it allowed them to take on more leverage and
increase profits. But in the end it was bad for everyone because mortgage-
backed securities were priced on the assumption that the risk that any
particular mortgage would default was independent of other default risks,
whereas when things got bad, many households defaulted on their
mortgages at the same time.14
Many consequences of this arrangement were unforeseen by most
economists (who, after all, are only boundedly rational). As discussed in
Chapter 4, mortgage-backed securities allowed banks to lower lending
standards, which allowed more people to enter the housing market, which
fueled a housing bubble. But this couldn’t go on forever; after a decade of
rising house prices, the pool of potential new low-income buyers was
exhausted. Therefore, housing prices had to come down, and when that
happened many homeowners defaulted on their mortgage payments and the
value of mortgage-backed securities plummeted.
Another side-effect of offloading risk using mortgage-backed securities
is that it coupled the world’s financial institutions together more tightly than
anyone realized. American mortgage-backed securities seemed like such a
good deal that many banks and investors throughout the world bought them.
The years leading up to the crisis were a period of quiet markets and steady
growth. As a result, everyone was highly leveraged, so when mortgage-
backed securities lost value, the portfolios holding them came under serious
stress. A few financial institutions (like Lehman Brothers) collapsed or

nearly collapsed and everyone quit lending. But because businesses depend
on loans to keep the real economy going, this caused stock markets to drop
precipitously and unemployment to skyrocket. Closing the loop, even more
homeowners defaulted on their payments, and housing prices dropped
further, stressing lenders and the economy even more.
To sum up, the crisis of 2008 was caused by a self-reinforcing feedback
loop involving the interaction of housing markets, credit markets and the
real economy. This feedback loop was not properly understood beforehand;
though many pundits had predicted the housing bubble, very few of them
predicted that its demise would cause a complete shutdown of credit (and
hence a major recession). This was a failure to understand systemic risk.
Later in this chapter, we’ll discuss a simple model that captures an
important aspect of the feedback loop between volatility and credit that
drove the crisis, but first we need to understand something about the
modern history of risk management.
The evolving landscape of risk management
We have to control risk, but risk management can have unintended systemic
side-effects, and if these aren’t properly considered, the results can be
disastrous. The organization that recommends standards for controlling
risks in banking is the Basel Committee, which has representatives from all
the G20 countries as well as important banking centers such as Singapore
and Hong Kong. One of their principal recommendations concerns
leverage. Starting in 1988, under what is now called Basel I, limits were
mandated for bank leverage.15 The size of the leverage caps varied based on
the asset and could change from time to time.
Between 1991 and 1999, when I was at Prediction Company,
conventional wisdom about risk control evolved substantially. In 1991,
most firms managed risk by using fixed limits on leverage, even if they
didn’t explicitly follow Basel I. Even at the time, it was obvious that this
method suffered from several problems.
The first problem was that the riskiness of assets can change due to
clustered volatility. An asset whose price hardly moves, and so seems quite
safe, might suddenly become volatile and therefore much riskier. Assigning
risk based on face value does not automatically adapt to changing
conditions and requires monitoring and manual adjustment.

The second problem is that price movements of assets are correlated.
Positively correlated assets tend to move together, while negatively
correlated assets move in opposite directions. A portfolio of positively
correlated assets is riskier than a portfolio of negatively correlated assets.
Such correlations mean that the risk depends on the whole portfolio and
cannot be managed correctly on an asset-by-asset basis. Asset-specific
fixed-leverage caps cannot take this into account.
The third problem occurs for trading strategies that hedge risks by short-
selling (which produces profit if an asset drops in price). Fixed-leverage
caps fail to take the resulting risk into account; again, risk needs to be
managed at the level of the whole portfolio.
Because of all these problems, in the 1990s most firms abandoned fixed-
leverage caps for a method called Value-at-Risk or VaR. This involves
managing risk at the level of the portfolio, based on the probability of a loss
of a given size. For example, on a daily scale, a 5 per cent VaR of $1
million means that 5 per cent of the time (that is, one day out of twenty) you
should expect to take a loss of $1 million or more. VaR tracks volatility; if
the estimated volatility increases, VaR increases, and vice versa.
In theory, VaR solves all three of the problems raised above, and it
initially seemed like a big improvement over fixed-asset-level leverage
caps. Volatility is far more predictable than the direction of price
movements, and while volatility forecasts aren’t perfect, they’re pretty good
under normal conditions (though of course it is the surprises that cause
problems). Since VaR rises and falls with volatility, this makes risk control
dynamic – that is, the suggested leverage varies based on market conditions.
Under VaR, as volatility goes up, leverage goes down, and vice versa.
In 2004, the Basel committee implemented a new set of
recommendations called Basel II, which, among other things, specified VaR
as the standard for risk control.16 This was by then accepted wisdom in the
financial community. From the point of view of an individual institution, it
makes good sense. When volatility is high, things are riskier than normal,
so it’s appropriate to use less leverage. Similarly, if volatility is low, it
should be safe to use more. What could be wrong with that?
There were a few voices in the wilderness, such as Charles Goodhart and
his collaborators, who worried that Basel II might have dangerous side-
effects.17 As we’ll see, their concerns were valid.

Prudent risk management fueled the crisis
The 2008 financial crisis was complicated, but some of its essential
elements can be captured in a simple agent-based model. This model
suggests that the crisis was in part caused by misunderstanding the systemic
risk inherent in Value-at-Risk. We’ll see how a simple model of risk
management, using the procedure recommended by Basel II, can lead to an
endogenous leverage cycle, with a long, slowly building boom followed by
a precipitous crash. This happens even without any shocks from the outside
world, and provides a good example of how bounded rationality (based on
widely used heuristics) leads to a chaotic attractor with endogenous
dynamics.
The role of leverage in the crisis is illustrated in Figure 12, which shows
the evolution of three important market indicators from 2002 to 2015. The
S&P 500, a weighted index of the largest 500 US stocks, represents the
stock market. In the period leading up to the crisis, the S&P index rose
steadily from a trough of 776 in October 2002 to a peak of 1,565 in October
2007, then plummeted to 677 in March 2009, a level only 43 per cent of its
value at the peak and lower than its value in 2002. Such a large drop in the
market capitalization of US companies reflected larger problems with the
national economy, and was one of the main symptoms of the crisis.
Remarkably, as the stock market was climbing before the crash, the
volatility of the S&P index steadily dropped by more than a factor of 3,
reaching its trough in January 2007. (This is represented by the VIX, an
index of stock volatility based on options prices.) Though still low,
volatility then rose slowly until it spiked in August 2008, reaching a level
nearly twice as high as its starting point.

Figure 12. Comparison of the US stock market (dashed), broker-dealer leverage (solid) and volatility
(jagged).17
US broker-dealers exhibited the most dramatic behavior of all. A broker-
dealer is an institution that trades both for its customers (acting as a broker)
and for its own account (acting as a dealer). Most of the investment banks
that played central roles in the crisis, such as Lehman Brothers and Bear
Stearns, had broker-dealers using leverage. Broker-dealer leverage steadily
climbed alongside the S&P index between 2002 and 2007, rising by roughly
the same amount. When the S&P index started to fall, leverage climbed
dramatically, spiking sharply upward at the beginning of 2008 and reaching
a peak nearly four times its 2002 level. It then plummeted just before
volatility spiked. Leverage continued to drop, so that in 2009 it was lower
than it had been in 2002.
Were the movements of these indicators unconnected, or did they have
causal relationships that give insight into the crisis? John G.’s model
suggested they were connected; ours, however, provides an even simpler

explanation that helps us understand not just the crash, but the build-up to
the crash.
The model we built to answer these questions was developed by
Christoph Aymanns, my first graduate student at Oxford. He had a master’s
degree in physics from Imperial College in London, where he was nearly
top of his class, and then went to work at McKinsey & Company for a year
before coming to Oxford. The research we did was supported by a large
grant from the European Union, whose projects are identified by acronyms.
Ours was CRISIS, which stood for Complexity Research Initiative for
Systemic InStabilities. I was scientific coordinator for this complicated
grant, which involved eleven institutions spread across seven countries and
was not easy to manage. One of our goals was to make a comprehensive
model of a financial system so that we could test policies for averting
crises.
Christoph and I set out to model how investment banks use leverage and
how this affects prices. We began by building an artificial economy – an
agent-based model with a financial system consisting of several investment
banks and a few assets, and a simplified real economy that had production,
labor and consumption. Then Christoph began playing with the model to
see what it did.
Initially, the simple artificial economy we built was unregulated – that is,
we didn’t impose any risk-control measures on the banks, nor did they
impose any on themselves. We just gave them an initial endowment of
assets, which we let them buy and sell. They could use leverage in a
completely unregulated way, which we called passive leverage. An example
of the behavior of the stock market under passive leverage is shown in the
top panel of Figure 13.
Over short time spans, the stock-market index varied in a random-
looking way. While this resembles a real stock market, such behavior is not
viable in the long run. The artificial banks in our simulation were using
leverage and taking risks. In the absence of any risk control, they would
eventually take risks that were too high, and they would fail.
To manage their risk, we imposed the Basel II regulations. This raised
and lowered their leverage limits based on the stock-market volatility. The
behavior of the economy changed dramatically, as seen in the lower panel
in Figure 13, labeled active leverage. The stock-market index began to
oscillate! During each oscillation, prices slowly rose and then abruptly

crashed, before the cycle repeated itself. The oscillations varied in period
and amplitude, but the basic pattern was clear. For reasons that were
initially mysterious to us, the act of imposing risk control under VaR had
completely altered the behavior of the market. We had imposed no shocks
from outside the system; the market was making its own booms and busts,
apparently for no reason at all.


Figure 13. Comparison of two agent-based simulations of the stock market.18 The panels show prices
vs time for two different risk-control protocols. Given ‘passive leverage’ there were no risk controls.
The bottom panel is exactly the same, except that the banks are required to manage their risk
according to the policies recommended by Basel II.
To understand this behavior, Christoph began simplifying the model by
removing elements until the oscillating behavior stopped. The simulation
shown in Figure 13 had three banks and three stocks. Christoph reduced this
to one investment bank and one stock, and even got rid of the real economy,
so there was only a very simple financial system. As long as the bank
managed its risk using VaR, as recommended by Basel II, we saw the
oscillations.
The outcome was a model that we described in a paper called ‘Dynamics
of the Leverage Cycle’.20 This model was extremely simple, which was nice
for conceptual understanding but perhaps too simple to be convincing. We
later teamed up with Fabio Caccioli and Vincent Tan to create a more
realistic model, detailed in another paper, ‘Taming the Basel Leverage
Cycle’.21 In the interest of brevity I’ll skip the first model and describe the
more realistic second model.
It involves two types of investor: An investment bank that uses leverage
and a fund that does not. They trade a single asset, whose supply is fixed –
their alternative is to hold cash. They are both given an initial endowment
of the asset, and then they begin to trade. At each step, both the fund and the
bank evaluate their demand for the asset, and the price is set so that supply
equals demand. A diagram of the resulting model is shown in Figure 14.
The strategies of the two agents consist of a few simple but widely used
heuristics. The fund is a value investor who knows the value of the asset,
buys it when it’s undervalued and sells it when it’s overvalued (the first
heuristic). The bank is an investment bank that has a leverage target and
adjusts its leverage according to the recommendations of Basel II based on
VaR (the second heuristic). The bank also periodically updates its volatility
estimate by taking an average over the recent past. (The average is taken
using exponentially decreasing weights, meaning recent volatility is
weighted more than past volatility – the third heuristic.) There’s also a
random shock that alters the fund’s estimate of the fundamental value,
which can be turned up or down or even set to zero.

Figure 14. A simple schematic diagram of the Basel leverage-cycle model. There are two agents: the
fund, which represents all unleveraged value investors, and the bank, which represents all investors
with leverage targets. The equity flow is from their buying and selling of the asset, and the shock
represents outside noise that randomly influences the fund.
That’s it. The model lumps the entire investment-banking world into a
single bank and the entire fundamental-value world into a single fund, and
ignores everything else. This is a representative-agent model, and an
extreme simplification, but that was helpful here because it made the model
easy to analyze and allowed us to understand why the oscillations emerged.
The model has a few parameters that control its behavior. Perhaps the
most important parameter is the relative wealth of the bank and the fund.22
If the fund has most of the wealth, then the dynamics are stable. The price
of the asset stays close to its fundamental value, and the leverage and
volatility are more or less constant. In contrast, if the bank has more wealth,
everything changes significantly, and the system begins to oscillate, as it
does in the bottom panel of Figure 13. Surprisingly, the oscillations persist
even if the shocks are turned off. This is because the oscillations are
chaotic; the system shows sensitive dependence on initial conditions and
has all the properties of chaotic dynamics, as discussed in Chapter 1.

In the course of a cycle, the stock price, leverage and volatility behave
much as they did in the crisis, as shown in Figure 12. The stock price and
leverage slowly build, while the volatility slowly drops. Then the market
suddenly crashes, the leverage plummets and the volatility spikes sharply
upward. The frequency of the oscillations depends on the time-window
used to compute volatility. When we do this using a two-year window,
which is the industry standard, the cycle takes about ten years, roughly
equivalent to the period of smooth growth in the build-up to the 2007–2008
crisis. The transition from the stable to the unstable regime occurs at a
leverage equal to about 9.23
Why does the system do this? Because VaR is inherently destabilizing.
Whenever the price drops, the investment bank sells in order to lower its
leverage. It thus systematically sells into falling markets, and, if the bank
were the only actor, the market would immediately crash. The incipient
crash is prevented by the unleveraged value investor, who stabilizes the
market by buying when the price falls and selling when it rises. The
stability of the system depends on the competition between the value fund
and the investment bank. As long as the investment bank is small or its
appetite for leverage is low, the system is stable. But if the investment bank
is large or its appetite for risk is high, the market begins to oscillate. This is
because during the boom the estimated volatility slowly drops due to the
smoothing action of averaging past volatility. As the volatility drops, the
leverage increases nonlinearly, growing slowly at first and then suddenly
becoming very large (recall the example in Chapter 4). Leverage acts as an
amplifier; when the dial is turned up high enough, the system becomes so
unstable that even an infinitesimal perturbation can trigger a huge crash.
When the crash finally occurs, this drives the volatility up and the leverage
down, and the cycle repeats itself.
The fact that the transition between the stable regime and the chaotic
regime is both sudden and sharp poses a problem for regulators. Near the
transition, a small increase in the wealth of the investment bank causes the
system to abruptly move from a static fixed point to chaotic oscillations.
The oscillations don’t start out small and get bigger; when they appear, they
are full size. This is a good example of what in physics is called a phase
transition, in which a system suddenly changes from one state to another.
More realistic versions of this model could potentially help regulators
anticipate and prevent this kind of financial chaos.

When Christoph presented his model at a meeting at the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), it was strongly
criticized by a participant from the Bank for International Settlements
because of the lack of foresight of the agents. The criticism was roughly
this: ‘If the banks were rational, they would understand that their behavior
is leading to a crash and alter it accordingly – for example, by reducing
their leverage.’ My response was that real people are not always rational,
and certainly were not in the run-up to the crisis! Perhaps, if we had
recently experienced a similar crisis, and if we had had good quantitative
agent-based models for systemic risk in the 1990s, we might have been able
to see into the future well enough to avoid such a crisis, but we didn’t. Risk
management was evolving during the run-up to the crisis – VaR only began
to be widely implemented in the late 1990s.24 Thus, roughly a decade
elapsed from this point until the crisis occurred – consonant with the
timeline our model predicts. Our model suggests that implementing a new
risk-management policy that we didn’t properly understand likely played a
key role in causing the crisis. It also suggests that the use of VaR, as
recommended by Basel II, together with the use of high leverage, were
sufficient to have caused the crisis on their own. Although the model does
not contain all the mechanisms that fueled the crisis, such as the housing
bubble, it generates behavior that quantitatively matches the crisis and the
events leading up to it. The housing bubble may only have been the spark
that lit the fire.
Our model is in the spirit of Hyman Minsky’s and John G.’s prescient
warnings, and we all agree that high leverage is problematic. But the
underlying mechanism causing problems is different: Minsky argued that
greed and competition would drive leverage up when markets got too quiet,
and John G. argued that the problem is due to heterogeneous investors, with
different levels of optimism. We show that systemic financial risk can be
caused by prudent investors – the problem exists even if investors aren’t
greedy, and even if they all act the same way. In our model, investors vary
their leverage based on volatility because their risk manager tells them to
do so, believing this makes them safer.
The job of a regulator like the Basel Committee is to set the rules of the
game to make the financial system work for everyone. We need credit to
make the economy run, but too much credit is destabilizing. Like
Goldilocks, the regulator needs to get things ‘just right’. That said, the

precautionary principle would suggest that regulators should err on the
conservative side, setting leverage limits low enough to leave an ample
buffer in order to ensure stability. The regulator’s job is complicated by the
fact that the leverage cycle appears suddenly and at full size. Because
leverage levels build slowly, and because random external events can affect
prices and volatility, it’s hard to know that we’re in a cycle until the
situation is already out of control. Nonetheless, high leverage, climbing
markets and low volatility all signal that the market is in trouble.
Is it possible to formulate a better policy that allows higher leverage
without increasing the risk of leverage cycles? To investigate this question,
we introduced a generalization of the Basel leverage policy with a
parameter that allowed us to use any mixture of Basel I (constant leverage)
and Basel II (VaR). We found that the best policy depends on the situation.
As we expected, when the banking sector is small and leverage is low,
Basel II was the best policy. But when the banking sector is bigger and/or
its leverage is higher, then the best policy is closer to Basel I. It’s a matter
of making the right tradeoff between individual and systemic risk.
We also explored alternative policies and found that we could
significantly improve risk management by giving the bank more time to
respond to changing conditions – for instance, by allowing it to adjust its
leverage targets slowly when the financial system comes under stress. This
caused a big improvement, and provides important advice for regulators.
We could only investigate this because our model is dynamic – it cannot be
understood with a static equilibrium model.
Taken together, John’s original leverage model, Stefan’s model presented
earlier in this chapter and Christoph’s model above show how standard
economic theory and complexity economics are complementary. John’s
equilibrium model blazed the trail, showing that the Modigliani-Miller
theorem does not apply, and illuminating the basic principles of leverage
cycles. Stefan’s agent-based model showed that leverage doesn’t just lead to
crashes – it contributes to clustered volatility and fat tails in price changes
on an ongoing basis. Christoph’s model discovered a different kind of
leverage cycle, caused by risk management alone, and illustrated how this
could lead to a slow boom followed by a rapid bust. Both agent-based
models provided platforms to study policy, showing the advantages of
alternative risk measures and the effectiveness of giving borrowers more
time to reduce their leverage.

In 2010–11, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision formulated a
new protocol, Basel III, which is still not fully implemented, and there is a
Basel IV on the horizon. These policies include more stringent caps on
leverage and involve changes in the precise way leverage is calculated, as
well as regulation of many other aspects of banking, including liquidity.
When fully implemented, they will force investment banks to hold a few
trillion dollars more capital in reserve than they did before, which will
likely lower their profit margins. Not surprisingly, this is all very
controversial. Many banks feel the regulations are excessive; other parties
feel they don’t go far enough to prevent the next crisis. I think the only way
to resolve this question is to build carefully calibrated agent-based models
that represent the heterogeneous agents of the financial system more
realistically and allow us to get quantitative answers.
The construction of such models is in progress. Working with the Bank
of England, my ex–graduate student Alissa Kleinnijenhuis built a prototype
for a potentially realistic model of systemic risk in global financial markets,
and another ex-student Garbrand Wiersema invented a mathematical
method to systemically understand the channels of contagion in financial
markets and their interactions, which has been used by the Bank of South
Africa.25 ,26 These models, which are ready to be put into practice, could
provide new tools for monitoring and regulating the financial system.
In summary, providing a better understanding of systemic risk in
financial markets is one of the success stories of complexity economics,
which could be further developed to make financial markets safer.
The resemblance between financial and fluid turbulence
Although the financial system and fluid flow are very different phenomena,
they have many things in common, and the correspondence between
financial turbulence and fluid turbulence has proven useful for concrete
applications such as predicting the volatility of financial markets. As we
will discuss in the next part of the book, the correspondence between the
two phenomena may also offer insights into how we can do a better job of
monitoring and regulating financial markets.
A fluid is anything that flows freely, like a gas or a liquid. When a fluid
is slightly stressed, its motion is calm (called laminar by the experts), but
when it is strongly stressed, it becomes turbulent. Picture the wind blowing

over the sea: On a calm day the sea is flat. As the wind starts to blow,
ripples form – not only are they small, but their shape is more or less
regular. As the wind blows harder, the ripples turn into waves, which get
bigger and bigger, and their motion becomes more and more irregular – the
motion becomes turbulent. In a hurricane this becomes what is called fully
developed turbulence.
As Edward Lorenz realized, turbulence is due to chaotic dynamics. As
soon as the movement of the ripples becomes irregular, the motion is
chaotic. Turbulence corresponds to complicated chaos, with many degrees
of freedom. Like financial markets, fluid turbulence exhibits clustered
volatility and fat tails. In a market, the clustered volatility is due to irregular
price movements; in a turbulent fluid flow, it’s due to the irregular motion
of the fluid. Figure 15 shows a measurement of the fluctuations of wind
velocity in a given direction at a given point in space. There are periods of
relative calm interspersed with gusts of wind, reminiscent of the clustered
volatility for stock market returns in Figure 10.
The resemblance goes much deeper. As shown in a remarkable paper by
the experimental physicist Shoaleh Ghashghaie and collaborators, the
fluctuations for both fluid turbulence and finance vary across different
scales in precisely the same manner.27 They compared a fluid-turbulence
experiment to a finance ‘experiment’. In the fluid-turbulence experiment,
they measured fluctuations in wind velocity between two probes at different
locations, varying the distance between the probes from millimeters to
meters. In the finance experiment, they recorded the fluctuations of the
Deutschmark–dollar exchange rate by looking at the change in prices over
time-intervals ranging from five minutes to two days. Then they compared
the distribution of the sizes of the fluctuations in both cases.
Figure 15. Intermittency in fluid turbulence. Fluctuations in the wind velocity as a function of time
(in minutes) for turbulence in air.

They first matched the millimeter-separation fluctuations for fluid
velocity against the five-minute fluctuations in prices. Because of clustered
volatility, both distributions have fat tails. Most of the time, the fluctuations
are small, creating a sharp peak in the center, but once in a while the
fluctuations become large, creating a fat tail. As they went to larger scales,
either by putting the velocity probes further apart or by measuring the price
changes over a longer time, the distributions became less fat-tailed. By the
time the probes were a few meters apart, or the prices were two days apart,
the distribution became close to a normal distribution, with thin tails. As the
scale changed, the distributions of the velocity fluctuations and price
fluctuations changed in exactly the same way.28
The analogy between fluid and financial turbulence has practical
applications. This was demonstrated by a group of French theoretical
physicists studying fluid mechanics, including Jean-Francois Muzy, Jean
Delour and Emmanuel Bacry, who adapted their techniques for predicting
volatility in fluid turbulence to finance. This required only minor changes in
the theory.29 Their models give better predictions for price volatility than
previous techniques used in finance, though, as it happened, two financial
economists who were then at Yale, Laurent Calvet and Adlai Fisher,
independently developed a similar method around the same time.30 (Calvet
and Fisher were strongly influenced by Benoit Mandelbrot, an early pioneer
in chaos and complex systems, who also knew a lot about fluid turbulence.)
It is striking that the same mathematical methods provide state-of-the-art
forecasts for volatility in both finance and fluid turbulence.
In Chapter 1, we distinguished between simple chaos and complicated
chaos. Fluid turbulence is an example of complicated chaos. In a strongly
turbulent system, like a hurricane or rapids in the Colorado River as it flows
through the Grand Canyon, there is both structure and randomness. This is
only a conjecture – I have no way of proving it at present – but I believe
that the dynamics of global financial markets are also an example of
complicated chaos, more accurately called high-dimensional chaos or chaos
with many degrees of freedom.
Complicated chaos, like fluid turbulence, happens in unstable systems
with many interacting components. In the financial system, when there are
many agents using high leverage or when trend following becomes
prevalent, prices become unstable. The global financial market has become
enormously complicated and closely connected: All developed countries

have stock markets and bond markets. Hundreds of thousands of assets are
traded globally every day. Hundreds of thousands of investors pursue
diverse trading strategies. High-frequency traders turn over their positions
in fractions of a second, while low-frequency value investors hold their
positions for years: The difference in timescale is a factor of 10 million!31
As we saw in the LTCM crisis and the crisis of 2008, markets do not behave
independently – a disruption in Thai markets nearly brought down the US
financial system. (Similarly, Lorenz famously pointed out that a butterfly
flapping its wings could influence the trajectory of a hurricane.) In such a
complicated system, with the strong nonlinear feedback introduced by
leverage and trend following, it would be surprising if the movements of
prices were not chaotic and high-dimensional. Financial markets are
undoubtedly complicated and competitive, and as discussed in Chapter 7,
chaos and clustered volatility should be expected.
Our Basel leverage-cycle model makes it clear how leverage creates
nonlinearities that can cause even a very simple financial system to be
chaotic. That model is so simple that it cannot exhibit complicated chaos,
but in a more realistic model, replacing the two representative investors
with a more realistic constellation of diverse, heterogeneous investors, one
would still expect to see chaos, but with more complicated, turbulent
behavior. The models in this chapter suggest that leverage in financial
markets corresponds to stress in fluid flows, and indicate that as market
participants use higher leverage, the financial system becomes more
turbulent.
The weather is the best example of how fluid turbulence affects our
lives. A concerted and coordinated global effort has allowed us to make
accurate weather predictions. Could we learn from weather prediction how
to better understand the economy and keep its turbulence under control?
We’ll explore this idea in the next part of the book.
...
