PART IV:
Climate Economics
Climate change has already begun to alter the Earth’s weather. The intensity
of storms is increasing and shifts in rainfall patterns are disrupting
agriculture and causing wildfires. Carbon dioxide persists in the atmosphere
for thousands of years so, even if we stopped greenhouse-gas emissions
immediately, we would still face a likely global sea-level rise of more than
a meter this century alone, and many more in centuries to come. Moreover,
runaway nonlinear feedback effects – such as the release of carbon-bearing
methane from thawing tundra and less reflected light due to diminishing ice
coverage – could potentially amplify human-induced climate change. We
need to bring greenhouse gases under control soon to avoid catastrophic and
irreversible changes in the biosphere, mass migrations, mass extinctions and
disruption of the systems that provide us with food and clean water. To limit
the average global temperature change to 1.5°C (2.7°F), we need to bring
net emissions to zero within the next twenty years or so.1
While understanding climate change is the domain of physical scientists,
understanding climate change’s causes and potential solutions is largely the
domain of social scientists. Greenhouse gases are a byproduct of economic
activity. In order to stop emitting them, we need to transform virtually every
facet of the global economy – including land-use practices, which account
for about a quarter of emissions, and crucially, the way we generate and use
energy, which accounts for the remaining three quarters. While the energy
sector constitutes only about 4 per cent of GDP, every industry uses energy;
the entire economy collapses without it.
The change from fossil fuels to non-carbon-emitting energy sources is
often called the green-energy transition, where the word green emphasizes
the many other benefits, such as reduced air pollution, that will come from
abandoning fossil fuels. Since renewable energy sources and fossil fuels
have different supply chains, this transition will require re-wiring much of
the production network, shifting the occupational balance in the labor force

and building new infrastructure for generating and distributing energy.
Humanity has experienced this scale of rapid change only once, during the
Industrial Revolution of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
Switching to a net-zero carbon economy will also require structural
transformations in other economic sectors, including transportation,
construction and farming. Investors, insurance companies and central banks
have begun to realize that physical risks caused by climate change, such as
flooding, hurricanes, sea-level rise and lethal heat waves, pose major risks
for the economy. Navigating the transition will require new business
models. There will likely be significant shifts in wealth and power within
and across nation-states, affecting sociological polarization and geopolitics.
Before we discuss the economics of climate change, let’s look at how we
learned to predict weather and climate, a story that contains valuable
lessons for economics and for how we might address the economic origins
of climate change.
...
