12.
How we Learned to Predict Weather and
Climate
If a single flap of a butterfly’s wings can be instrumental in generating a
tornado, so also can all the previous and subsequent flaps of its wings, as
can the flaps of the wings of millions of other butterflies, not to mention the
activities of innumerable more powerful creatures, including our own
species.
Edward N. Lorenz (1972)1
Predicting the weather
Attempts to predict the weather date back thousands of years, but weather
forecasting achieved a huge breakthrough in the second half of the
twentieth century, thanks to a combination of better science, better
measurements and better computers. Over the last seventy years, a
coordinated, large-scale, global effort and an investment of hundreds of
billions of dollars have enabled us to predict the weather remarkably well.2
Because we make daily global weather forecasts, we test weather-
forecasting models all the time, so we know how good they are. Testing
climate models is more challenging, because it requires running scenarios
we have not yet experienced. Nonetheless, reliable weather models give us
a good starting point for modeling climate.
Understanding the weather has been a matter of concern throughout
recorded human history. Babylonian tablets discussing weather forecasting
date from 650 BCE. The word forecast was coined by Robert FitzRoy, who
captained the HMS Beagle when Charles Darwin sailed with her. In 1854,
he founded what would later be called the British Met (Meteorological)
Office with the help of Francis Beaufort (whose surname all sailors will

recognize). In 1870, the US Weather Bureau (now called the National
Weather Service) was formed; it collected data from more than 500
observation stations and made daily forecasts throughout the country.3
In those days, forecasts were subjective, based on experience and
intuition. Forecasters kept a large library of past local weather maps, which
they studied carefully and used to develop rules of thumb (heuristics).
Much as we did at Prediction Company, they observed patterns in past
behavior that allowed them to anticipate future behavior. One of the
procedures they followed, called the method of analogs, illustrates the
underlying principle that these methods are implicitly based on. It works
like this: The forecaster studies the current weather map, and might think,
‘This reminds me of the build-up to that big storm back in December of
1935.’ Then he looks through his library to find similar weather maps. If
December 10, 1935 provided a good match, he would look ahead to
December 11 as a possible forecast for tomorrow’s weather, adjusted to
account for differences in factors like wind speed and direction. He might
search for other, similar weather maps and repeat the procedure. Then he
would lick his finger and put it in the air, make a subjective judgment, and
produce a forecast.
The basic principle of the method of analogs is that the future will follow
the same patterns that existed in the past. This principle is extremely useful,
and is the basis of all statistical models, with broad applications beyond
weather forecasting. It underlies the breakthroughs in machine learning that
are revolutionizing everything from image recognition to writing high-
school term papers. In fact, such methods are now used by Google to make
forecasts a few hours ahead in places where the coverage of weather models
is poor.
The method of analogs, and its extensions via econometric models, is
still the most useful forecasting tool in economics. Instead of weather maps,
the forecaster compares economic conditions in the present to past events.
This method is limited, however, because there are just too many possible
patterns. There’s an enormous amount of information in a weather map (or
in the state of an economy) at any given point in time. Even with a library
of thousands of historical maps, the weather on any given day is never
really close enough to the weather on any previous day to produce an
accurate forecast. (Similarly, the economic conditions now are rarely
similar enough to conditions in the past to make reliable predictions.)

Because the weather is chaotic, small differences between today’s weather
map and a historical weather map turn into large differences between them
on the following day. Subjective weather forecasts were better than nothing,
but their value was limited. A new approach was needed.
In 1901, Cleveland Abbe, the Weather Bureau’s chief meteorologist,
proposed a radically different method that has come to be called numerical
weather forecasting.4 He suggested using the laws of physics to predict the
weather. His proposal had the same essential elements as our method for
beating roulette discussed in Chapter 1: understand the forces, measure
initial conditions and use them to make predictions. Of course, weather is
vastly harder to predict than roulette. It involves the interaction of
temperature, pressure, wind velocity and humidity, as well as many other
variables, such as topography. Gathering initial conditions requires
simultaneous measurements over a fine grid covering the entire globe. It
now seems obvious that we should predict weather this way, but in 1901
there were no computers, measurements were limited and the physics of the
weather was still poorly understood. Cleveland Abbe’s proposal was
regarded as audacious and utopian and led to no immediate action.
The first numerical weather forecast was published by the English
polymath Lewis Fry Richardson in 1922.5 Richardson was an early
complex-systems scientist who made contributions to mathematics, physics,
meteorology and psychology. He was one of the first to articulate the idea
of fractals, and he was the first to develop a quantitative theory for the
causes of wars. His Quaker upbringing made him an ardent pacifist, which
exempted him from military service, but in England at the time, it also
disqualified him from holding a proper academic appointment.
Richardson’s attempts at numerical weather prediction continued even
while he was working in a Quaker ambulance unit during World War I. He
eventually set himself a very specific task: To predict the weather for 1.00
p.m. on May 20, 1910, based on measurements made at 7.00 a.m. that day.
The weather depends on nonlinear equations whose dynamics are chaotic,
which means that the equations have to be solved step-by-step through time
and require an enormous number of arithmetic calculations. To cope with
this challenge, he introduced a procedure for solving the equations
numerically by hand. I mean literally by hand: He performed tens of
thousands of arithmetic calculations with pencil and paper! Even using the
biggest supercomputers in the world, the time and memory such

calculations take continues to define the limit on how accurately we can
predict the weather. Imagine what it was like for Richardson using nothing
but a pencil and paper – and on a battlefield to boot.
Making a six-hour-ahead forecast took Richardson about six months.
Unfortunately, the way he ingested the data into his model was flawed, so
the answers he obtained were off by a factor of 100. The publication of his
failed results had the opposite effect of the one he had hoped for, putting a
damper on numerical weather prediction for the next two decades.
In his 1922 book, Richardson went beyond his weather-forecasting
results and wrote about how parallel-processing might be used to make his
methods practical. He imagined a city of 10,000 human ‘computers’, who
would live in a special city. Every day, they would go to work and take their
positions in a stadium-like enclosure. Each human computer would perform
designated calculations with pencil and paper, and pass the results to her
neighbors on every side (while her neighbors passed their calculations to
her). Then the process would be repeated, with each ‘computer’ making a
new calculation in response to the inputs from her neighbors. Richardson
estimated that even though each calculation would still be slow, the
parallel-processing power of 10,000 people working simultaneously would
speed things up enough to produce useful real-time forecasts. It was an
extraordinary vision, but it was never implemented for weather prediction.
It was, however, put into action during World War II, when squads of
human ‘computers’ solved equations relevant for the design of the atom
bomb and performed other calculations for the war effort.
In 1950, John von Neumann was searching for non-military applications
for digital computers and decided that weather prediction was a good
candidate. He spoke to Carl-Gustaf Rossby, one of the leading
meteorologists of the day, who in turn recruited his young associate at the
University of Chicago, Jule Charney, to lead a team of other researchers.
Working intensely for two years, they produced a weather model simple
enough to run on the ENIAC computer.6 The ENIAC was extremely crude
by the standards of modern computers. It had only 10 words of read-write
memory and 624 words of read-only memory, and could do 357
multiplications per second – more than a million times slower than a
modern smartphone. Von Neumann’s wife, Klara, taught the team how to
program and checked their code. By working around the clock with the
ENIAC for thirty-three days, they produced four retrospective forecasts.

The results were not as good as existing subjective forecasts, but they were
good enough to provide a proof of principle – and the field of numerical
weather prediction was born. At the time, the next day’s forecast still took
twenty-four hours to perform on the ENIAC, but the meteorologists were
confident that computers would speed up and reduce calculation times.
The global scientific community, governments and the military saw the
potential of numerical weather forecasting, and work began in earnest to
make forecasts faster and more reliable. Since the 1950s, hundreds of
billions of dollars of public investment have gone into producing daily
weather forecasts using numerical weather prediction. This effort has
included developing a better understanding of the physics involved,
improving numerical methods for solving the underlying equations on a
computer, getting more accurate measurements (particularly via satellites)
and taking advantage of bigger and faster computers.
With hindsight, it might seem obvious that numerical weather prediction
would be better than subjective weather forecasting, but it took almost
thirty years of hard work for this goal to be achieved. I became aware of the
contest between subjective and numerical forecasters at its turning point,
around 1980, while I was a graduate student doing research on chaotic
dynamics. I had the good fortune to be asked to intern at the National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) with Edward Lorenz, the pioneer
of chaos theory and one of the leading meteorologists of his day.
Since my internship was unpaid, to save money I camped illegally on the
spectacular mesa that NCAR sits on, near Boulder, Colorado. My tent had
to be hidden during the day, and because I was using NCAR’s
supercomputer until late in the evening, it was a nuisance to set my tent up
in the dark. If I was confident it wasn’t going to rain, I preferred to sleep
under the stars. I told Ed about my dilemma, and in my conversation with
him at the end of each day, I would ask him whether he thought it was
going to rain. He had a corner office with a big window looking out over
the Great Plains. He would peer at the sky and study the clouds for a few
moments, and then give me one of three answers: ‘Yep’, ‘Nope’, or ‘Can’t
tell’. He was an excellent subjective weather forecaster: With the caveat
that he used ‘Can’t tell’ about 50 per cent of the time, he was never wrong,
and I never got wet due to a bad forecast. I later learned that he had been a
weather forecaster in the Pacific during World War II, so he had had some
practice.

I remember asking him when he thought he and the other physical
meteorologists would beat the subjective weather forecasters. He told me
they were breaking even, but steadily getting better and would soon pass
them. This is exactly what happened – numerical weather prediction now
produces far more accurate forecasts than subjective weather forecasters
ever did.
The enormous improvements in accuracy have changed our whole
attitude toward weather forecasting. Although reliable long-term forecasts
are inherently impossible because of the underlying chaotic nature of the
physics of fluid turbulence, short-term weather forecasts are now
reasonably accurate. This is economically useful: Estimates indicate that the
US spends about $5.1 billion per year on weather forecasting, for an
economic benefit of roughly $30 billion.7 Since 1980, forecasting accuracy
has improved by about one day per decade – that is, the six-day forecast
now is about as accurate as the five-day forecast was ten years ago.8
The standard economic models that many national statistics offices,
central banks and treasury departments use to make economic predictions
are on a much smaller scale than weather forecasts, and they aren’t nearly
as useful. We’re still at the point where the method of analogs and its
econometric extensions perform as well as or better than theory-based
models. As discussed, standard models operate at a much higher level of
aggregation and do not make use of microdata. If weather models have an
economic value to the US of $30 billion per year, better economic models
could save us trillions of dollars a year, but there is no large-scale effort to
build such models.
Predicting the climate
The global-circulation models that are used to predict the response of the
Earth’s climate system to increased levels of greenhouse gases were
developed out of models for weather prediction. Given that the dynamics of
the weather are chaotic, and therefore unpredictable in the long run, you
might think that modeling the climate, which involves predicting on
timescales of centuries or more, would be impossible. Fortunately, climate
involves a different kind of prediction, which makes it in a sense easier:
Climate models make a prediction about the statistical properties of the
weather rather than a forecast of its future state. We can’t say whether or not

it will rain a hundred days from now; we can, however, estimate how often
it will rain in a world with more greenhouse gases by running a numerical
weather simulation with increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere for a
very long span of time and recording how often it rains in the simulation.
Similarly, we can predict how high, on average, global temperatures will
rise over time in response to a given level of carbon in the atmosphere.
Thus, while chaos imposes a fundamental limit on short-term weather
forecasting, it imposes no such limit on the accuracy of climate prediction.
One of the best ways to test climate models is to use them to predict the
past. Carbon-dioxide levels and temperature have both varied substantially
over time. Tests are made by running global-circulation models with past
carbon concentrations to see whether the resulting temperature predictions
match the corresponding historical values. The match is still far from
perfect, but substantial progress has been made.
Climate models have improved substantially in the last forty years, but
their predictions are surprisingly consistent with earlier models. In 1979,
Jule Charney led an early study of climate change entitled Carbon Dioxide
and Climate: A Scientific Assessment.9 The report stated, ‘We estimate the
most probable global warming for a doubling of CO2 to be near 3°C with a
probable error of ± 1.5°C.’ Almost precisely the same statement appeared in
a report of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
thirty-five years later.10 Our current carbon-dioxide level is about 1.4 times
the pre-industrial level, and unless we take drastic action immediately we
are likely to reach the doubling point in about fifty years. The last time the
Earth was 3°C degrees warmer than it is now was 3 million years ago, when
beech trees grew in Antarctica, the seas were 80 feet higher, and horses
galloped across the Canadian coast of the Arctic Ocean.
It is a remarkable tribute to the power of science and the usefulness of
large-scale models that we can forecast the complex phenomenon of climate
change fifty to a hundred years into the future. But climate models can
inform us only about the consequences of our actions; they don’t tell us
how to solve the problems we’ve created. Re-wiring the economy so that it
no longer emits greenhouse gases will require a major structural
transformation. Our current economic models are woefully inadequate to
guide us through this transition. If only we had economic models as good as
our climate models . . .

Lessons for economics
There are several striking differences between the way we make economic
predictions and our predictions of weather and climate:
Weather forecasts have systematically improved over time. Economic forecasting, in
contrast, has never been very accurate and has made only slow, incremental progress over
the last eighty years. Numerical forecasting of the economy has yet to convincingly surpass
simple statistical models implicitly based on the method of analogs.
Weather is modeled from the bottom up. Weather modelers seek to model the atmosphere at
the finest scale possible, whereas government models for policymaking operate at the
aggregate level of a nation-state and use only a single representative household. The contrast
with weather models is stark: It would be utterly hopeless to predict the US weather based
solely on measurements of its average temperature, barometric pressure and wind velocity.
The fact that our ability to make measurements and run models at a finer scale has been
the biggest driver of improvements in weather forecasting’s predictive power demonstrates
the importance of a bottom-up approach. Current weather models track the relevant
variables on a three-dimensional grid in which each cell is 10 kilometers by 10 kilometers
wide and 100 meters high, with roughly 100 such cells stacked vertically. Each cell requires
a measurement of temperature, wind and humidity, which makes for a total of about 10
billion measurements over the entire globe. The global-circulation models for climate use a
coarser grid, 100 kilometers by 100 kilometers wide and 1 kilometer high, but this still
produces an enormous amount of information. Just as the improvements in computers over
the last seventy years have been driven by the increasing density of integrated circuits, many
if not most of the advances in meteorology have been driven by the increased density of grid
points in weather measurement and simulation. Weather simulation using the finest grids
possible requires state-of-the-art computers, and weather prediction employs some of the
largest computers in the world, each of which consumes about 10 megawatts of power
(enough to supply about 8,000 American households).
Weather models are highly nonlinear. Weather is an emergent phenomenon, and a linear
weather model would be useless. In contrast, while economic dynamics are also an emergent
phenomenon, and most of the DSGE models we talked about in Chapter 5 are intrinsically
nonlinear, many of those used for policymaking are simplified and replaced by linear
approximations that are easier to solve. This means, among other things, that endogenous
business cycles are ruled out from the get-go.
Weather models are global. Weather models are closed – that is, they cover the entire world,
so that a storm never appears from ‘off the map’. This is essential to capture endogenous
phenomena. In contrast, most official economic models are open – meaning, for example,
that they pertain only to a single nation-state, so that outside influences from other countries
(which are clearly important, such as a default in Thailand) have to be treated as exogenous
shocks. While some types of economic models are global, many, if not most, still model
only one country at a time.
If we were to implement agent-based economic models at a global scale,
similar to those used for weather or epidemiology, all of the ‘in contrast’

statements above would disappear. Such agent-based models would use the
finest scale feasible. With an all-out effort, it is now conceivable to
construct agent-based models on a one-to-one scale, so that each simulated
person in the model corresponds to a similar real person and each company
corresponds to a specific real company.11 Running such a model, which
would require state-of-the-art data gathering and computer power, would
cope with nonlinearities and thus could potentially predict such emergent
phenomena as recessions, financial crises, inequality and economic growth.
These predictions could be made at many levels, from individual firms and
groups of households to industries, nations and the whole planet. While
there are factors that make simulating the economy harder than simulating
the weather, there are also factors that make it easier.12
Complexity economics can do for economics what Cleveland Abbe
imagined for weather prediction. What Abbe proposed took eighty years to
reach fruition, but today we complexity economists already have adequate
computer power and much of the data needed to realize our ambitions. With
an appropriate effort, we could build much more accurate agent-based
models in five years or less, which could give us invaluable guidance in
negotiating the climate-driven transition of the economy and other global
problems that depend on economics. In Chapter 14 I will briefly describe
some efforts that are already underway.
...
