13.
Climate Economics and Technological
Progress
Sensible policies on climate change should weigh the costs of slowing
climate change against the benefits of slower climate change.
William Nordhaus (2003)1
Predictions about the anticipated impacts of climate change aren’t perfect:
We can’t say precisely how much warming will happen for a given level of
carbon in the atmosphere, and we don’t know exactly how high and how
quickly sea levels will rise, or when the carbon locked in the tundra will
warm enough to begin emitting vast quantities of methane. However, there
is a remarkable scientific consensus that these effects present a grave
danger. The economics of climate change, meanwhile, remains highly
controversial – both as to how much the green-energy transition will cost
and the right way to make it happen. Some say that it will be very
expensive, while our recent work (discussed below) says it will save us
money. Some say we need a crash program to build more nuclear reactors;
others (like me) say this would be a waste of money that could be spent
more usefully elsewhere. Some say we need a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade
system; others say we should simply criminalize carbon emission. Some say
that, with the right incentives, the market will take care of everything;
others say the government should play a leading role – for example, by
investing in new technologies. Some say that we must abandon the idea of
economic growth; others (like me) say that we can stop emitting greenhouse
gases while continuing to grow if we invest in the right technologies. Far
too many people say there is nothing we can do. To make the green-energy
transition rapidly and cheaply, we need reliable models, based on empirical

data, that allow us to predict the likely outcomes of each possible course of
action.
To reduce and ultimately eliminate greenhouse-gas emissions produced
by the burning of fossil fuels and bad agricultural practices, we need to
dramatically change the technological underpinnings of much of the global
economy. What is the best way to do this? How much will it cost?
I realized that I could contribute to solving this problem when the
Director of the US Department of Energy’s National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, Dan Arvizu, came to the Santa Fe Institute in 2008 with a few
of his scientists and asked us to help them ‘think out of the box’. The core
of the planning problem was to understand which green technologies were
most likely to be able to replace fossil fuels soonest and at the most
affordable price.
Our conversations led to a workshop at SFI attended by leading
technologists and economists studying the climate transition. The room was
full of disagreement. Many advocated for wind and solar energy, together
with various forms of energy storage. Others were fans of nuclear power;
still others advocated carbon capture and storage – that is, removing the
carbon dioxide when fossil fuels are burned, before it enters the
atmosphere. Who was right? It was not enough to know what different
methods of generating energy currently cost; we needed to know what the
costs would be twenty to fifty years in the future. The economics of climate
change hinges on anticipating how the costs of the various technological
solutions are likely to change over time.
William Nordhaus, an economist from Yale, was present at the
workshop. In a paper published in 1991, he was the first person to address
the economics of climate change.2 In February 1992, he unveiled the
Nordhaus model, DICE, which stands for Dynamic Integrated Climate
Economy. It is based on a traditional, aggregate macroeconomic model,
similar to the Solow model discussed in Chapter 5, using a single
representative household that works for a single representative firm that
produces a single good. Nordhaus assumes this represents the entire world.
His DICE model extends the Solow model by adding an abatement function
and a damage function. The abatement function specifies the cost of
reducing emissions to a given level. You can think of abatement as an
investment – by spending a given amount of money every year, we reduce
emissions by a certain amount. The damage function gives the future

economic cost of global warming as a function of total emissions. The
reduction in the cost of the damages is like the return on the investment.
Nordhaus performs a cost-benefit analysis: The right level of investment to
combat climate change is computed by maximizing the utility of the
representative agent, which is effectively the best compromise between the
cost of abatement and the benefit of avoiding future damage.
While the Nordhaus model recommended that we should take action to
mitigate climate change, it suggested that we should do so at a measured
pace. In a recent paper, Nordhaus wrote that the optimal, ‘welfare
maximizing’ course of action would eliminate emissions so slowly that it
would result in about 3.4°C (6.1°F) of warming above pre-industrial levels.3
That’s a lot of warming! Though the resulting sea-level rise would occur
slowly, it would eventually submerge most large cities. Nordhaus
subsequently received the Nobel Prize in 2018 for this work.
I strongly disagree with Nordhaus’s conclusions. Many prominent
mainstream economists, such as Nicholas Stern, Joseph Stiglitz and Jeffrey
Sachs, also disagree.4 They argue that Nordhaus’s abatement function is
much too costly, his damage function is much too low, and his discount rate
is too high (meaning he doesn’t give enough weight to the future in relation
to the present). I agree with these critiques, but I go a step further:
Addressing energy-related emissions to combat climate change will very
likely save us a lot of money. The technological forecasts from my research
group at Oxford indicate that the green-energy transition will ultimately
make energy prices substantially lower than they have ever been. From a
purely economic perspective, even if climate change were not a looming
threat, we should still make the energy transition quickly (doing most of it
within twenty years). In addition to the huge benefits a fast transition will
reap for the climate, if we discount all the costs to the present, it will
probably save us tens of trillions of dollars. Here’s how my collaborators
and I arrived at that conclusion.
Predicting technological progress
For the economy to make the climate transition as quickly and cheaply as
possible, we need to know which technologies are most likely to succeed in
replacing fossil fuels quickly at the lowest cost. Given that technological
progress depends on innovation, which is by definition unanticipated,

predicting the pace of progress might seem a senseless task. But
surprisingly, rates of technological progress are very predictable, even if the
specific technological solutions that will achieve these rates are not.
Forecasting technological progress is possible because technological
change is persistent, and the rates of change for different technologies vary
widely. Figure 16 documents the enormous diversity in prices of a few
representative goods and services in the United States from 1998 to 2018,
with prices adjusted to include inflation and taking quality improvements
into account. Lower prices are one of the most salient manifestations of
technological progress. In those twenty years, the price of hospital services
skyrocketed, increasing by more than a factor of 2, while the cost of
televisions dropped by a factor of 20. Hospitals made negative progress, at
least in terms of the cost to society, while televisions made rapid progress.5
Furthermore, the rates of change are persistent: If we had observed these
trends for the first ten years, we could have made a good prediction for the
next ten.
Figure 16. Differences in the price of some goods in the US from 1998–2018.
Moore’s Law is perhaps the best-known method of predicting
technological improvement. In 1965, Gordon Moore, Director of R&D at
Fairchild Semiconductor, noted that the density of components in integrated
circuits doubled roughly once a year and predicted that this trend would

continue for at least ten more years.6 In 1975, he revised his prediction to a
doubling in density every two years. Roughly fifty years later, his
prediction has proved remarkably accurate. While his prediction applied
only to the density of components (transistors, capacitors, resistors, etc.),
similar improvement rates hold for computer cost, speed and energy
consumption per bit of computation.
It turns out that many other technologies follow a generalized version of
Moore’s Law, in the sense that their prices fall roughly exponentially with
time. This was demonstrated in a 2006 paper by Heebyung Koh and
Christopher Magee. Chris Magee attended the 2008 SFI workshop on green
technologies. He is an emeritus professor of engineering systems at MIT
and was previously Director of Programs and Advanced Engineering at the
Ford Motor Company. Koh and Magee gathered data on a variety of
different technologies, such as electrical transmission cables, flywheels and
batteries, and demonstrated that these technologies improved at exponential
rates over time spans of many decades, though with highly diverse rates of
progress.7
Gordon Moore was not the first to propose a law for technological
change. There is a much older law for technological improvement that goes
under a variety of names, including learning by doing, the experience curve
and Wright’s law. This law was originally postulated in 1936 by Theodore
Wright, who has an interesting background. He was the brother of both the
influential evolutionary biologist Sewall Wright and Quincy Wright, one of
the pioneers of international political science. Rather than following his
brothers into academia, he became a World War I flying ace and went into
the aviation business after the war. In 1936, he observed that whenever the
cumulative production of a given type of airplane from a given factory
doubled, its cost of production dropped by about 20 per cent.8 As it turns
out, this law applies to many other technologies besides airplanes, though
the rate at which the price drops varies substantially from technology to
technology (and in most cases is close to zero).
Wright’s Law applies not just to products emerging from a specific
factory; in many cases it applies globally as well, meaning that when the
global production of a given technology doubles, its average global cost of
production drops by x per cent, where x depends on the technology. Wright
was a special advisor to Roosevelt during World War II, in charge of
boosting aircraft production, and he successfully used his own law to

forecast the costs of airplane manufacturing. However, for most
technologies, x is close to zero, which means that Wright’s Law is not
useful. For some technologies, like nuclear power, x can even be negative
(meaning the cost goes up over time rather than down).9 Because of the
wide variation in improvement rates, supporting some technologies is far
more effective than supporting others.
Why should Wright’s Law hold at all? The popular hypothesis is that
cumulative production correlates with level of effort, and improvement is
proportional to effort; as more of something is produced, more effort will be
put into improving it, and costs will drop. In a paper led by my ex–graduate
student and now Santa Fe Institute colleague James McNerney, we explored
the hypothesis that engineers improve things using a zero-intelligence
model, in which they try out random solutions and pick the best ones. We
showed that this leads to Wright’s Law, and that complicated technologies
with many interacting parts should improve more slowly.10
Wright’s Law and the generalized Moore’s Law are important because
they provide the best tools we have for predicting the future performance of
a technology. In a commentary on nuclear power in Nature, in 2010, I
published my first prediction of solar-photovoltaic costs using Moore’s
Law, predicting that it would be cheaper than coal-fired electricity by
2020.11 To put this in context, at the time the global weighted average cost
of solar-PV energy without storage was about 38 cents per kilowatt-hour (in
2020 dollars), much higher than it is now, and most commentators regarded
my prediction as implausible. A widely quoted 2014 article in The
Economist held that ‘solar power is by far the most expensive way of
reducing carbon emissions’.12 Since then, its cost has plummeted, even
more steeply than I expected; I predicted 12 cents per kilowatt-hour by
2020, and instead it was only 6 cents.13 Now solar energy is substantially
cheaper than nuclear power, whose costs are in the 12–20 cents per
kilowatt-hour range. In most locations, solar energy is now even cheaper
than coal-fired electricity.
Okay, I was more-or-less right, but so what? My arguments were not
convincing. To be convincing requires more evidence. We needed to gather
data and perform statistical tests.
Our early data-gathering efforts at SFI were led by my Transylvanian
postdoc Béla Nagy. Béla was then in his forties; he had had a career as a
computer programmer before getting his PhD in statistics from the

University of British Columbia. He was passionate in his quest to
understand technological progress, and he worked hard to make our project
succeed.
Given that technological progress is the most important driver of
economic growth, you might think there would be extensive databases
documenting it. Quite the opposite: At the time, it was difficult to find data
systematically recording the performance and cost of technologies over
long spans of time. Government statistical agencies collect data on
consumer products and intermediate economic goods, but only for
economically significant products, and such data is often too aggregated to
be useful. We wanted data for key technologies and tasks, such as
transistors or gene-sequencing – data that statistical offices do not track. So
we had to collect our own, but we had no budget to do so. Béla solved this
problem by assembling a group of high school and college students who
devoted free time to help him scour the literature. They even wrote to
Gordon Moore, who was kind enough to send us the data he had personally
collected on electronic components. The result was the Performance Curve
Database, which has data for about 100 technologies, covering a variety of
performance metrics, including cost, as a function of time.14 Though created
more than a decade ago, it is still the only publicly available database
documenting technological progress.
To test the predictive power of Moore’s Law, Wright’s Law and several
other proposed laws for technological improvement, our research team
pretended we were in the past. We then made forecasts about future
improvements using only the information that would have been available
back then and compared our forecasts to what really happened. We used this
method to measure the forecasting accuracy of six different hypothesized
laws for technological progress.15 We made about 6,000 forecasts for sixty-
two different technologies over time horizons ranging from one to thirty
years into the future. To our surprise, Moore’s Law and Wright’s Law tied
for first place. Their forecasts were better than any of the other four
alternatives, and they finished the race in a dead heat.
When we looked more closely at the data, we realized that there was a
simple explanation for the tie: For almost all of our technologies, the cost
dropped roughly exponentially as the cumulative production increased
exponentially. A simple math exercise shows that this results in Wright’s
Law. Béla later realized that this equivalence had been pointed out by

Devendra Sahal, an Indian scholar of technological change who wrote four
books about technological progress in the 1970s and early 1980s.16 But
when Béla tried to track him down, he found that Sahal had mysteriously
disappeared after the last of these publications. Béla became obsessed with
Sahal, gathering every possible piece of information about his life and
corresponding with his brother in India. Then, about a year later, Béla also
mysteriously disappeared. I hope that he and Sahal found each other, and
that they are together somewhere, discussing the causes of technological
progress.
One of the goals of my work with Béla was to find a formula for the
accuracy of Wright’s Law and Moore’s Law. Making forecasts of unknown
accuracy, which was the usual practice prior to our work, is of limited
usefulness – if you don’t know how good a forecast is, how can you rely on
it? Béla found an approximate formula, but it was complicated and didn’t
work particularly well, and we had no good way to test it.
After moving to Oxford, in 2015 I hired a postdoc named François
Lafond, and we found an elegant solution to this problem. François is an
economist by training, an extraordinarily open-minded scholar, and among
the most intellectually honest scientists I know. He is skeptical of
everything, particularly his own work – which means his results can be
trusted. I have so far managed to convince François to stay at Oxford, and
he now co-leads my research group.
François and I derived a simple formula for the accuracy of Moore’s
Law. We began by generalizing the law, reformulating it as what is called a
geometric random walk with drift.17 Our underlying hypothesis was so
simple that we assumed that our formula would give mixed results, but
when François tested it on the Performance Curve Database, to our
astonishment, it worked extremely well. When updated to allow for year-to-
year correlations, it did a good job of predicting the accuracy of our
forecasts for diverse technologies and time horizons. With a little help from
me, François managed to derive a similar formula for Wright’s Law.18
Our formulas for Moore’s Law and Wright’s Law go beyond the state of
the art by predicting the distribution of possible future outcomes. Unlike the
simple application of Wright’s Law, which gives a point forecast with a
single answer of unknown reliability, our formula gives the likelihood of
each possible outcome using a method that has been extensively tested on
many technologies. For example, our forecast for solar panels using

Moore’s Law is shown in Figure 17. The most likely cost for 2030 is
substantially cheaper than it is now, but there is still a 5 per cent probability
that solar panels will be at least as expensive as they are now. Lower costs
are likely but not guaranteed. This forecast was made in 2013; costs since
then have dropped even faster than the median prediction, but they’re well
within the likely values we predicted. Our confidence in the formula comes
from the fact that we know it has done well in the past, not just for solar-PV
modules but also for other technologies.
Our method allows technologies to differ in their rates of improvement.
It also allows them to differ in their volatility: A technology that has
historically stayed close to its trend line is more predictable than a
technology that strays from it (as solar modules did during the first decade
of the millennium).
Figure 17. Prediction of the likely cost of solar-photovoltaic (PV) modules made in 2013. Prices are
in dollars per watt-peak, meaning the price to buy a module that can generate a watt of energy in full
sunlight. The grey circles are historical prices of PV modules and the squares are measured values
since the prediction was made. Each band corresponds to a probability of 5 per cent; at any given
time, there is a 5 per cent probability that the future price will be in the white area outside of the
bands.
This method is extremely useful, but it gives no insight into what
actually causes technological improvement. With hindsight, it is possible to

tell causal stories. For example, the flattening in solar-PV costs between
1999 and 2006 was caused by material shortages, and the plunge
immediately afterward was caused by China’s entering the market. These
kinds of events would have been difficult to forecast, and our method
doesn’t attempt to do so. Each technology has its story, but our model
doesn’t need to know anything about those stories. It just takes advantage of
the fact that technological trends are highly inertial – once a technology
begins a trend, it usually continues that trend. While technologies
sometimes break away from their trends (each story is special), our model
also takes this into account in estimating the future uncertainty.
While Moore’s Law and Wright’s Law give similar forecasts for the data
in the Performance Curve Database, from a policymaker’s point of view
they lead to completely different conclusions. Suppose a policymaker wants
to encourage the success of a technology through feed-in tariffs that support
deployment – for example, by compensating households for putting solar
panels on their roofs. Moore’s Law implies that costs will go down at a
given rate no matter what, so if Moore’s Law were literally true, money
spent on a feed-in tariff would be wasted. In contrast, Wright’s Law
suggests that costs will drop only through effort. This brings up a question
of cause and effect: Do costs go down because cumulative production goes
up (causing effort to go up)? Or does production go up because costs go
down on their own, thereby increasing demand? Policymakers need to
know the answer to this question to invest our tax dollars wisely.
To test the cause and effect of Wright’s Law, François and I tried to find
a good natural experiment and settled on World War II.19 During World War
II, the United States went from being the eighteenth-largest military in the
world to producing two-thirds of worldwide military equipment (for both
sides combined). We know that President Roosevelt didn’t say, ‘Tanks are
getting cheaper, let’s build more.’ Rather, the US spent whatever it needed
to win the war. Furthermore, while production rose rapidly from 1939 until
the middle of the war, it declined rapidly as the war ended. Since production
stopped increasing exponentially after the war’s end, this makes it possible
to distinguish between Wright’s Law and Moore’s Law.
As usual, collecting data was the biggest hurdle. We hired a research
assistant, Diana Greenwald, who trolled through the archives in Detroit and
Washington, photographed microfiches, sent them to India for transcription
and put together a comprehensive data set for hundreds of products

produced for the US war effort, ranging from high-tech items like radars to
low-tech items like blankets. François performed a careful data analysis,
showing that about half of the cost decline for individual technologies is
explained by their increase in cumulative production. The other half is
explained by the overall trend; the costs of all technologies tended to come
down as the war effort ramped up. Thus we can say with some confidence
that increasing cumulative production can drive prices down, even if this is
not the full story.
So, our answer to policymakers is yes: Subsidies can bring technologies
that follow Wright’s Law down their learning curves and lower their prices.
This doesn’t hold for all technologies, because some, like fossil fuels and
nuclear power, don’t follow Wright’s Law. But for those that do, Wright’s
Law provides useful guidance for finding the cheapest and fastest way to
mitigate climate change. (In addition, James McNerney’s model in Chapter
3 shows that improvements also come from enhancements to the inputs of a
given technology, so, for best results, subsidies need to be distributed
thoughtfully.)
A rapid green-energy transition will likely save us money
We applied our forecasting methods to the green-energy transition in a
research project led by Rupert Way. Rupert began this project after finishing
his PhD in differential geometry, an abstract field of mathematics with no
relation to climate change. However, he was passionate about climate
change, wanted to do something practical, and convinced me that he could
quickly learn what he needed to know. Rupert became an expert on energy
technologies, collected an enormous amount of data, and built an energy
model with some help from Matt Ives, Penny Mealy and myself.20
The history of energy provides some perspective and motivates our
model. How has the energy system changed in the past? Figure 18 shows
how the energy landscape has evolved over the last 140 years. The plots
have a logarithmic scale, in powers of 10, so exponential trends become
straight lines. The panel on the left gives the historical costs of the principal
energy technologies and the panel on the right gives their deployment. In
the left-hand panel, the diagram becomes congested as we approach the
present, with most of the curves on top of one another, indicating that we
are in a period of unprecedented energy diversity. There are many

technologies competing for dominance, all with global average costs near
$100 per megawatt-hour.
Figure 18. Historical global cost and deployment of energy technologies. The panel on the left shows
the inflation-adjusted useful energy costs (or prices for oil, coal, and gas), while the panel on the right
shows the global production of useful energy.20
The long-term trends show how this competition is likely to be resolved.
Fossil fuel prices are volatile, but (inflation-adjusted) prices now are similar
to what they were 140 years ago.21 In contrast, for several decades the costs
of solar photovoltaics, wind and batteries have dropped (roughly)
exponentially, at a rate near 10 per cent per year. If these trends continue,
renewables will soon become much cheaper than fossil fuels, even when the
costs of energy storage are considered. They are already substantially
cheaper than nuclear power, whose cost rose by about a factor of 3 since its
first commercial use in 1956 and then reached a plateau. In contrast, the
cost of solar cells has decreased by more than 3 orders of magnitude since
its first commercial use in the Vanguard satellite in 1958.
The panel on the right shows how the deployment of energy
technologies has evolved since 1880. It documents the slow exponential rise

in the production of oil and natural gas over a century, until they eventually
replaced traditional biomass around 1955 and caught up with coal around
1980. It also shows the rapid rise and plateauing of nuclear energy. But
perhaps the most remarkable feature is the dramatic, exponential rise in the
deployment of solar PV, wind, batteries and hydrogen electrolyzers over the
last decades as they transitioned from niche applications to mass markets.
Their annual rate of increase ranges from about 100 per cent for
electrolyzers to about 20 per cent for wind. Nuclear energy also underwent
a rapid expansion in the 1960s, but, unlike nuclear energy, renewables all
have exponentially-decreasing costs. The combination of exponentially-
decreasing costs and exponentially-increasing deployment has never
occurred for any other energy technologies. This positions renewables to
challenge the dominance of fossil fuels within a decade.
Let’s pause to take in some good news about what is already underway.
Look carefully at the steeply rising curves for solar, wind and batteries in
the right panel, which are growing at unprecedented rates. Rapid action on
climate change is already in progress, though few people are aware of it. In
part, this is because the data is difficult to obtain, but I think it’s mostly
because our intuition for rapid exponential growth is poor. To see it requires
viewing the world through logarithmic glasses. Just when we desperately
need energy technologies to replace fossil fuels, they are appearing and
growing at an exponential rate! If most of us haven’t taken this in, it’s
because exponential change starts out small, sneaking up on us before
suddenly appearing onstage. Assuming that historical trends persist,
renewables will become a substantial part of the energy system over the
next few years.
We need to solve the problem of intermittency for renewable power
sources to fully replace fossil fuels. Solar and wind power are variable, so
we need long-term energy storage. Overnight storage can be accomplished
by batteries, but they aren’t a good solution for longer-term storage. A better
solution is provided by hydrogen-based fuels, in which solar or wind
electricity is used to make hydrogen, which is then used to make fuels such
as ammonia, which are denser and easier to transport and store. Hydrogen-
based fuels can then be used for any application where fossil fuels are
currently used. This includes making electricity; they can be stored and then
cleanly burned later (without carbon emissions) to generate electricity when
sunlight or wind are lacking.22 Although the electrolyzer technologies

needed to make hydrogen-based fuels are still expensive, their costs, too,
have been declining, and they also show rapid exponential growth (about
100 per cent per year). However, the deployment of hydrogen-based fuels
still lags behind the other technologies, and we need to do everything we
can to maintain and even accelerate their growth.23
But will clean-energy technology costs continue to drop at the same rate
in the future? And what does this uncertainty imply for the overall cost of
the green-energy transition?
To put my group’s answers to these questions in perspective, let’s first
discuss how mainstream economics models answer them. The dominant
approach is via integrated-assessment models. The Nordhaus DICE model
is a simple example, but there are also much more complicated models that
render the energy system in great detail. For a given target to limit global
warming, integrated-assessment models calculate the ‘optimal’ energy
transition that maximizes the utility of a representative household. These
models are normative, not descriptive. In other words, they attempt to
describe the path we should take, rather than the path we’re likely to take.
Simple models like the Nordhaus model do everything at an aggregate
level, meaning with a single representative agent standing for everyone in
the world, and based on global abatement and damage functions, averaging
over all technologies and all parts of the world. So many different things are
lumped together that it is difficult to compare to reality, and impossible to
properly take the heterogeneous nature of technological change into
account. Many of these models simply assume that technology costs remain
roughly where they are now.
More complicated integrated-assessment models render the energy
system in detail and model technological improvement using Wright’s Law
(though, so far, not with our improved version including error estimates).
They then constrain climate emissions following a given scenario and
compute the set of decisions that maximize utility in this scenario. Among
other things, the output of these models includes the deployment and cost of
each energy technology over time.
An alternative is provided by the World Energy Model, developed by the
highly influential International Energy Agency (IEA). The IEA, a
consortium of thirty-one countries, was founded after the oil crisis of 1973–
74 to oversee oil supplies and has since broadened its mandate to
investigate related global energy issues, including the climate-induced

energy transition. Its World Energy Model is a complicated simulation
covering supply, demand and innovation for all of today’s significant
energy technologies. It makes ‘medium to long-term energy projections’.
(The word projections in effect ducks the responsibility associated with the
word forecast.)
Integrated-assessment models and the World Energy Model have been in
existence since the early 1990s, so we now have almost thirty years of data
available to check their track records. To summarize briefly, their
performance has been terrible. In our paper, led by Rupert Way, we
examined 2,905 projections made by various integrated-assessment models
for the annual rate at which solar-PV costs would fall between 2010 and
2020. The mean value of their projected annual cost reductions was 2.6 per
cent, and all were less than 6 per cent. In stark contrast, during this period
solar-PV costs actually fell by 15 per cent per year. The IEA forecasts are
similarly poor (and have been since the inception of their model). Both
types of models have consistently and wildly underestimated the
deployment of renewables and overestimated their cost. My simple
extrapolation of the exponentially decreasing trend made a far better
forecast.
Why have these models done so poorly? Integrated-assessment models
have typically put in assumptions by hand about the maximum deployment
and maximum growth rates for renewables, and they typically impose floor
costs, corresponding to fixed levels that costs can never fall below. Figure
19 illustrates how floor costs assumed in the past in integrated-assessment
models have repeatedly been violated. There is no empirical evidence
supporting them, and the only arguments for imposing them are based on
supposed ‘common sense’. The reasons for the failure of the IEA’s World
Energy Model are less obvious – it is a complicated model, and the code is
not public – but apparently they rely substantially on expert opinions
instead of data extrapolation. Expert opinions have generally been less
reliable for predicting technological progress than data extrapolation.24

Figure 19. Track record of projections for PV costs and floor costs. The left panel compares
projections for PV costs to what actually happened. The right panel compares PV costs to floor costs
assumed in various integrated-assessment models, demonstrating that PV costs have consistently
penetrated assumed floor costs.
While these models have been updated in an attempt to correct the
systematic biases in their past projections, and they are improving, their
view of the future continues to differ from what one would infer from
historical trends. Even in its Net Zero Emissions by 2050 scenario, the
current IEA projection is that solar will reach only 16 per cent of electricity
generation in 2050; this was recently updated from its previous projection
of 11 per cent, which itself had been updated from a still-lower number. All
of the IEA adjustments have been in the same direction but have still not
changed sufficiently to match the historical trend. They have always been
wrong by a wide margin, underestimating the deployment of renewables
and overestimating their cost.
In our 2022 paper, ‘Empirically Grounded Technology Forecasts and the
Energy Transition’,25 we took a different approach. Unlike the models
discussed above, which generate their projections for the deployment of
different technologies endogenously, we assumed hypothetical scenarios for
technology deployment and calculated the probability distribution for their

costs using the methods discussed in the previous section. Rather than
trying to compute optimal scenarios, we simply examined the cost of three
representative scenarios: Fast, Slow and No Transition. Our purpose was
not to find the best possible energy transition but to show that if current
trends continue for even another decade, we can make the green-energy
transition quickly and cheaply.
The deployment of technologies tends to follow an S-curve, in which
deployment increases exponentially and then levels off when the
technology saturates its market.26 This is evident, for example, for nuclear
power in the right panel of Figure 18. The key difference between our three
scenarios is that the historical deployment trends for renewables level off at
different times.
In our Fast Transition scenario, renewable energy and storage
technologies maintain their current deployment growth rates for a decade,
replacing fossil fuels in two decades. The S-curve doesn’t level off until
renewables become dominant, after which their deployment slows to grow
at 2 per cent per year. We chose 2 per cent growth because that’s the rate at
which global energy usage has been increasing for many decades; we
assume that the past trend for energy demand will continue into the future.
Short-term storage and electrification of most modes of transportation are
achieved with batteries (some in electric vehicles), while long-duration
energy storage and all hard-to-electrify applications are served by
hydrogen-based fuels. We tried to be conservative, erring on the side of
being pessimistic about renewables; for example, we assumed we will need
enough stored energy to run the entire global energy system even if the sun
stopped shining and the wind stopped blowing at the same time for a month
everywhere around the globe (which we estimate is likely more than is
actually needed).
For comparison, we also assumed a Slow Transition scenario, in which
current rapid-deployment trends for renewables slow down immediately, so
that fossil fuels continue to dominate until midcentury. Finally, again for
comparison, we assumed a No Transition scenario, in which the energy
system remains in its current form and each source of energy grows
proportionally at a 2 per cent rate (meaning fossil fuels are locked in
forever). This is close to what are now called ‘worst case’ scenarios (which
were until recently called ‘business as usual’ scenarios).

When we apply our cost-forecasting methods to these three scenarios,
the surprising result is that Fast Transition wins by a good margin – many
trillions of dollars in savings over the No Transition scenario. To state an
exact figure, one must compare future savings to current costs; this is
usually done by assuming a discount rate, which puts more weight on the
present than the future. The Fast Transition costs a bit more now, but it still
produces substantial savings in the future – and for all reasonable discount
rates. With the 1.4 per cent discount rate advocated in the Stern Review on
the Economics of Climate Change, compiled by the UK government in
2006, the average savings of our Fast Transition would amount to $12
trillion.27 Because rapid deployment brings us down the learning curve
faster, so that costs become lower sooner, the Fast Transition is also
substantially cheaper than the Slow Transition.
There are potential barriers to implementing the renewable-energy
transition quickly. Perhaps the most important is expanding the capacity of
the electrical grid. Electricity plays a much larger role in a world of
renewable energy – all vehicles, for example, will need to switch from
fossil fuels to either electricity or hydrogen-based fuels. We estimate that
grid capacity will need to be expanded by a factor of 4. Although the grid
costs for a rapid green-energy transition are substantial, we forecast that
they are likely to be more than offset by lower energy costs. In 2050, for
example, our estimated global annual expenditure on the electricity network
for the Fast Transition is about $670 billion per year, compared with $530
billion per year for the No Transition. However, the expected total system
cost in 2050 is about $5.9 trillion per year for the Fast Transition and $6.3
trillion per year for the No Transition. Thus, although the additional $140
billion of grid costs might seem expensive, it is significantly less than the
savings that come with cheaper energy.
Another potential barrier is the rapid deployment of technologies to
make hydrogen-based fuel. We assume that their current rapid exponential
growth continues, but it is vital that this trend not be interrupted.
We also examined a nuclear scenario, in which fossil fuels are replaced
mostly by substantially ramping up nuclear power. Nuclear power is already
more expensive than renewable technologies, and the gap will almost
certainly only widen in the future.28 The nuclear scenario is by far the most
expensive, with an average cost of $15 trillion more than No Transition and
$27 trillion more than the Fast Transition.29

In Chapter 1, I cited disagreement over austerity policies as an example
of the lack of consensus in economics. The controversy over the cost of the
climate transition is an even more urgent example. This is not just a matter
of academic debate. High cost estimates have dampened enthusiasm for
making the necessary changes quickly. If we are right that mitigating
climate change is a net economic benefit, and it is actually cheaper to act
quickly, then there are few remaining barriers to making the transformation
now, other than the vested interests of the fossil-fuel industry and NIMBY
resistance to grid expansion. Climate economics is an area where
complexity economics can make a huge difference to the world.30
We have explored the virtues of complexity economics and its
accomplishments to date, but its fullest potential lies ahead of us. Part V
presents my vision of its potential to dramatically improve the reliability of
economic models, and hence to help us formulate policies for solving some
of the world’s biggest problems. What we have accomplished so far only
scratches the surface of what is possible.
...
