15.
Removing the Roadblocks
I was taught the way of progress was neither swift nor easy.
Marie Curie
Complexity economics is still in its infancy, and a great deal of work
remains to be done to realize its full benefits. What are the costs and what
would the benefits be? How long will it take?
Collecting better data
Data is the principal driver of scientific progress. There’s a bidirectional
feedback between data and theory: Data both inspires the development of
theories and makes it possible to test them, while theories determine the
type of data we collect. Theories can only be proved wrong or right by data;
when this doesn’t happen, theories become detached from reality, and
science gets lost.
Better data is of central importance for improving agent-based models.
Unlike traditional mainstream models, which need aggregate data, agent-
based models need fine-grained data about individual firms and consumers
to realize their potential. This doesn’t mean that they necessarily need data
about specific firms and consumers, which might violate their privacy, but
they need data to tell them how typical firms and consumers behave.
Unfortunately, though it is feasible to collect fine-grained data, this often
does not happen because current data collection systems are geared to
provide the aggregate data needed by mainstream models. This creates a
chicken-and-egg problem: Because agent-based models are not mainstream,
the data are not collected, and because the data aren’t available, this

handicaps efforts to create agent-based models that make superior
predictions, which is a prerequisite for acceptance by the mainstream.
Progress in fundamental physics over the last fifty years illustrates how
science succeeds when we have the right data to test theories, and how it is
stymied when this is lacking. Fundamental physics made astounding
progress during the first two-thirds of the twentieth century, leading to the
theory of quantum mechanics, which predicts the behavior of atoms, and
the standard model, which predicts the existence and behavior of the
elementary particles that are the building blocks of matter and energy. The
data engines that drove these discoveries were particle accelerators, which
probe the structure of matter and energy by smashing particles together. But
making progress requires probing ever-smaller scales, which can only be
done by bigger, more powerful accelerators, using exponentially increasing
amounts of energy and money. As larger and larger accelerators were built,
data flowed in at a steady rate and particle physics advanced rapidly. But
each discovery cost more and required more energy than the one before it.
The current state of the art in physics is the Large Hadron Collider at
CERN. It is 27 kilometers in circumference and consumes 1.3 terawatt-
hours of electricity a year. The electricity alone costs $23.5 million
annually, enough to power 300,000 homes. But this is only a small part of
its cost – it employs about 2,200 people, with an operating budget of about
$1 billion per year. Its crowning achievement to date was the observation of
the Higgs boson in 2012, which confirmed theoretical predictions published
in 1964. This observation required a forty-year effort and cost about $13
billion.1
Gathering the data needed to understand the origins of dark matter and
dark energy requires even higher energies. Building an accelerator that
could do this would require such a massive expenditure of resources that
it’s unlikely to ever happen. Absent alternative sources of data, progress in
fundamental physics has nearly ground to a halt. The theories are far ahead
of the data and thus have become increasingly speculative, and the field is
bogged down in doctrinaire battles over the correct approach.
Fortunately, there are no such fundamental limits in economics. Quite
the opposite: It is now possible to collect vast quantities of data at a level of
detail that would have been inconceivable in 1950. Unfortunately, this isn’t
happening on the scale needed for agent-based models to fully realize their
potential.

In an ideal situation, to render the economy with verisimilitude, agent-
based models need data about the behavior of individual households and
firms. We don’t need information about any actual individuals, but we do
need to know in general how individuals make their decisions. For example,
what kind of house is a household with a given income and age profile
likely to buy? What are they likely to consume? How does this change in a
recession? Similarly, we need information about supply chains. In agent-
based modeling heaven, we would have access to the invoices and receipts
of all the companies in the world. These could then be used to initialize
agent-based models capable of simulating the economy in detail and
making much better predictions about everything, including how businesses
respond to disasters, business cycles and long-term growth.
Since we do not live in agent-based modeling heaven, the complexity-
economics group at Oxford and others have been developing methods for
reconstructing firm-level production networks. Such data is hard to obtain,
because firms don’t like to make their invoices and receipts public. There
are some countries (Belgium, Chile, Brazil, Ecuador, the Scandinavian
nations) where such data exists, but it’s hard to access, and most countries
don’t even collect this data. In the United States, it’s possible to obtain
partial information about the production network through a combination of
public regulatory filings and the media, and there are companies that collect
and sell such data. This provides a starting point, but the picture is highly
incomplete.
Reconstructing the firm-level network from the available data is like
trying to assemble a jigsaw puzzle with hundreds of thousands of pieces,
when you only have a small fraction of them and there is no picture on the
box. This might sound impossible, but, in a paper led by my clever graduate
student Luca Mungo, we showed that machine-learning methods are
remarkably effective in solving this problem.2 We’re in the process of
developing better methods, ones which combine all possible sources of data
on the production network that are good enough for modeling purposes,
even if they miss the details.
You may be thinking: Wait a minute! This sounds really intrusive. What
about Big Brother? Fortunately, we can do all this without leaking
confidential information. New statistical methods have been developed that
make it possible to construct randomized synthetic populations that match
almost any desired characteristic of a real population, without giving away

any information about real individuals. Similarly, there are now companies
that specialize in holding the supply chains of individual firms in secure
silos, allowing models to probe the silos of many different firms, as needed,
without giving away any firm’s confidential information. It is vital to
preserve confidentiality, and this requires effort and care, but it is feasible to
do so.
Developing methods and infrastructure
We need to improve techniques for fitting agent-based models to time
series, create an appropriate software infrastructure, and establish standard
interfaces and benchmarks so that models can be tested against each other.
Models always have free parameters; these are like knobs that can be
turned to produce a whole family of related models. Fitting a model to data
requires finding the model within this family that most closely
approximates the data.3 There are now many well-developed procedures for
fitting models if the functions they’re based on are smooth, meaning that
there are no discontinuities or kinks, but the problem becomes harder when
this is not the case. Mapping between the inputs and outputs of agent-based
models often lacks a simple expression in mathematical terms. Worse still,
it’s always nonlinear (otherwise no one would bother making an agent-
based model). For many years, it has been difficult to fit agent-based
models to data in a systematic manner; however, there has recently been
substantial progress.4
Another significant problem is that agent-based models are written in
many different programming languages that are incompatible with each
other, making it hard to compare their outputs. There are no standard
interfaces that let you mix and match, taking part of model A and using it in
model B. There are no benchmark data sets on which to run different
models to compare their predictions. Agent-based modeling for economics
is still in early stages, but fortunately it is beginning to make rapid progress.
Institutional support
In its present form, complexity economics lacks a home in academia. In the
United States, there is only one active research group, led by Robert Axtell

at George Mason University. There are perhaps ten small research groups in
the rest of the world, and tenure-track positions are extremely rare. The
situation in central banks is slightly better: Four or five central banks now
support small agent-based modeling efforts. In industry, in contrast, agent-
based modelers for problems like traffic control are very much in demand.
The resistance to complexity economics in conventional economics
departments is so strong that mainstream academia will likely be the last to
accept it. Before this happens, I expect agent-based models to find practical
applications in both industry and central banks. This will put pressure on
academia, and ultimately the gate to economics departments will open – or,
alternatively, new departments doing complexity economics may be created
to provide an academic home.
One thing that could dramatically alter the future course of economics is
a change in the criteria for the Nobel Prize in economics, which motivates
exceptionally ambitious and talented young researchers and strongly
influences its scientific agenda. The five original Nobel Prizes – in physics,
chemistry, physiology and medicine, peace, and literature – were
established in 1896 by a grant from Alfred Nobel. An essential criterion for
awarding the prizes in physics, chemistry and physiology and medicine is
empirical validation. If a theory has not been shown to be empirically valid,
no matter how popular, conceptually appealing or influential it is, no prize
is given. This criterion is strict. For example, although the general theory of
relativity is perhaps the most profound and remarkable accomplishment in
the history of science, Einstein’s Nobel Prize was awarded, in 1921, for
‘services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his discovery of the law
of the photoelectric effect’, because general relativity, while supported by
observation of the solar eclipse of 1919, was not considered sufficiently
well verified.5
The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred
Nobel, colloquially called the Nobel Prize in economics, was established
much later, in 1968. Although the nomination and selection processes
follow a procedure similar to those used for the other prizes, the selection
criteria for economics are closer to those used for the literature and peace
prizes than those for the other science prizes. The main criterion is
influence within the field of economics. Many of the prizes have been given
for theories that have not been empirically verified, and probably never will
be, because in hindsight they are very likely wrong. But why shouldn’t the

same criteria used in other sciences apply to economics as well? If the
Nobel Prize in economics made empirical validation an essential criterion,
this could prompt a more scientific approach to the study of economics.
For the last decade or so, my colleagues and I have been trying to fund
quantitative, large-scale complexity-economics models in the public sector.
While we have had some generous supporters (see the Acknowledgements
to this book), it is difficult to raise the funding needed to do this at scale.
Government funding agencies usually ask the advice of mainstream
economists, who do not usually support this idea. With a few exceptions,
most private foundations have more conventional charitable goals and do
not understand the need.
To bring these ideas to scale, my colleagues and I have started a
company called Macrocosm. Our goal is to build large-scale granular
models of the economy that make better predictions and reduce them to
practice, so they can be used day in and day out to address the important
problems discussed above. Our strategy is to fund our efforts through the
commercial sector, trying to guide it toward a more sustainable economy,
while keeping as much of the modeling power as possible available for
public good. Our intention is to put our models in the hands of treasury
departments, central banks and other influential actors in the global
economy so that they can plan more effectively.
Let’s conclude by zooming out to the big picture and thinking about the
benefits of complexity economics for humanity as a whole.
...
