16.
Becoming a Conscious Civilization
The principal contradiction in the whole system comes about because of the
inability of men to forgo immediate gain for a longtime good [. . .] We do
not yet have a sufficient number of people who are ready to make the
immediate sacrifice in favor of a long-term investment.
Dwight Eisenhower1
If the real economy is the metabolism of civilization, and the financial
system its enteric nervous system (its gut brain), then scientific models are
an important component of civilization’s nascent cerebral cortex. Just as the
cerebral cortex enables us to make sense of our environment, detect and
avoid dangers, plan ahead and reason, scientific models augment
civilization’s collective cognitive abilities. We increasingly use science and
scientific models to plan for the future and avert environmental threats. As
noted, agent-based models provided useful advice during the COVID
pandemic. The ability to rapidly create and manufacture vaccines saved
many lives. NASA’s Scout program, which searches for and performs
hazard assessments for potentially threatening near-Earth objects, such as
asteroids, may one day save Earth from a major existential catastrophe.
Weather forecasting helps us direct air travel and avert major accidents, and
climate prediction has alerted us to a major existential global threat, even if
we have so far been slow to heed its advice.
As climate change illustrates, we are increasingly altering our
environment, and in the course of doing so, creating unintended existential
threats to ourselves. While we once thought of nature as an entity unto
itself, independent of humanity, no aspect of the environment in today’s
world is unaffected by human activity. Forty per cent of global
photosynthesis is now required to support human civilization. For better or

worse, the world has become our garden, and we need to do a better job of
tending it.
To return to a biological analogy, in addition to the functions listed
above, our cerebral cortex provides us with the ability to understand and
model ourselves, which we call consciousness. Selfawareness is essential
for allowing individuals to cooperate and function as a society. Similarly, as
we increasingly dominate the planet, we need better models of our
collective behavior in order to survive and prosper. Civilization needs to
become more conscious.
Economics plays a central role in creating our collective environment.
Agent-based models of the global economy could potentially allow us to
better understand how our actions will shape our selfconstructed
environment and shape the future. This would endow civilization with
greater self-understanding and awareness and make a valuable contribution
to increasing civilization’s consciousness.
Throughout most of history, we have simply let events unfold. History
might be a guide, but its lessons can be murky and hard to follow. In
economics, statistical models and AI are useful, but they are inherently
limited – partly because past events are never enough like events in the
present, and partly because the world is always changing. As culture and
technology co-evolve, we create new technologies that lead to genuinely
new situations, with side-effects that are difficult to anticipate.
We now have the capability to build realistic agent-based models that
will allow us to safely experiment with diverse ideas about the best way to
run our economy and navigate societal challenges. These models will be
pale reflections of the real world, but, by grounding them in empirical data
and continually testing them, we can create and experiment with artificial
economies that yield useful insights and advice. Even if far from perfect,
their practical guidance could allow us to avert a great deal of economic and
social pain.
To put this in context, global GDP is on the order of $80 trillion per year.
The 2008 financial crisis cost the US alone approximately $10 trillion.
Suppose that by spending $100 million over the next five years we could
build a well-calibrated agent-based model of the global economy and avert
the next financial crisis of similar size. The payoff would be 100,000 to 1,
which corresponds to a financial return of 10 million per cent!

But let’s make a more sober estimate. Averting the next crisis with
absolute certainty is too optimistic. Suppose that the odds of succeeding are
only 1 in 100, and that by using a successful model we reduce the impact of
the crisis by only 1 per cent, meaning it is only slightly less bad – 99 per
cent of what it would have been otherwise. This might not sound like much
of an improvement – indeed, I think it is far too pessimistic – but even so
the return on the investment would still be 10 to 1, corresponding to a
financial return of 1,000 per cent.
Similar payoffs can be reaped by investing in models for other big
problems, such as navigating the green-energy transition, which will easily
cost us tens of trillions of dollars if we get it wrong, not to mention the
potential loss of biodiversity and the danger of increasing inequality and
social unrest. There are synergies between these problems; building a
modular laboratory to solve the climate problem makes it easier to solve
others. State-of-the-art agent-based models of the production network,
household consumption and the occupational network will let us do
economics on timescales ranging from days to decades. The calculation
above suggests that their construction is likely to be a very valuable
investment.
That said, it would be misleading to evaluate the benefits of prescient
models in purely monetary terms. A financial crisis that costs $10 trillion is
not just about rich people losing a lot of money; it entails widespread
unemployment, impoverishment, opioid use and all the other problems that
arise when people are put under financial stress.
Some might say that trying to smooth out the swings in the business
cycle is a bad idea. In Joseph Schumpeter’s theory of creative destruction,
mentioned in Chapter 2, business cycles and crises serve a useful role
because they clean out the dead wood, removing the incumbents to make
room for more dynamic, higher-quality businesses. But, even if
Schumpeter’s theory is true, recessions and crises may not be the only way
to achieve creative destruction. Building models like our Climate Policy
Laboratory, described in Chapter 14, might help persuade governments to
pursue other policies that could keep the economy on a steadier course
while allowing for some creative destruction.
In Chapter 14, I outlined how we could build a suite of new models to
help us solve some of the biggest problems facing civilization. Doing this
right would take a budget of tens of millions of dollars a year. This might

sound expensive, but to put it in perspective, we currently spend more than
$1 billion a year to smash elementary particles into each other, about $5
billion a year to predict the weather and about $500 million a year on polar
research. While I am a fan of all these activities – I am not advocating any
cuts in their funding – these figures suggest that it should be feasible to
spend a comparably modest amount to explore a new way of doing
economics that could help save civilization.
I believe that we can regulate the financial system to do its job well
without stirring up volatility and exacerbating inequality. I believe we can
implement policies that more fairly distribute profits while increasing our
economic output and shared well-being. I believe we can create a
sustainable economy that can promote the health of the earth’s ecosystems
while allowing us to prosper. I believe we can have the best of both worlds,
creating a smooth-running economy while allowing enough turnover for the
forces of creative destruction to do their job. But to create a road-map for
how to achieve these goals, we need to invest the collective resources and
effort to build large-scale quantitative agent-based models and let them
prove their full worth.
Sometime in the future, we are sure to create detailed agent-based
models of the global economy. Such models will be coupled to physical
models of the earth’s environment, and sociological and political agent-
based models of our collective behavior.2 I have no doubt that this will
eventually happen: The question is, when will it happen? We now have the
capability – the sooner we do it, the sooner we will reap the benefits.
A crash program to build full-scale complexity-economics models is a
good bet: One that could guide us toward greater prosperity, make our
planet healthier and help humanity thrive.
...
