Foreword
Since the 1980s an increasing number of physicists have been using ideas from statistical
mechanics to examine ﬁnancial data. This development was partially a consequence of
the end of the cold war and the ensuing scarcity of funding for research in physics, but
was mainly sustained by the exponential increase in the quantity of ﬁnancial data being
generated everyday in the world’s ﬁnancial markets.
Jean-Philippe Bouchaud and Marc Potters have been important contributors to this
literature, and Theory of Financial Risk and Derivative Pricing, in this much revised second
English-language edition, is an admirable summary of what has been achieved. The authors
attain a remarkable balance between rigour and intuition that makes this book a pleasure to
read.
To an economist, the most interesting contribution of this literature is a new way to
look at the increasingly available high-frequency data. Although I do not share the authors’
pessimism concerning long time scales, I agree that the methods used here are particu-
larly appropriate for studying ﬂuctuations that typically occur in frequencies of minutes to
months, and that understanding these ﬂuctuations is important for both scientiﬁc and prag-
matic reasons. As most economists, Bouchaud and Potters believe that models in ﬁnance
are never ‘correct’ – the speciﬁc models used in practice are often chosen for reasons of
tractability. It is thus important to employ a variety of diagnostic tools to evaluate hypotheses
and goodness of ﬁt. The authors propose and implement a combination of formal estimation
and statistical tests with less rigorous graphical techniques that help inform the data analyst.
Though in some cases I wish they had provided conventional standard errors, I found many
of their ﬁgures highly informative.
The ﬁrst attempts at applying the methodology of statistical physics to ﬁnance dealt with
individual assets. Financial economists have long emphasized the importance of correlations
across assets returns. One important addition to this edition of Theory of Financial Risk
and Derivative Pricing is the treatment of the joint behaviour of asset returns, including
clustering, extreme correlations and the cross-sectional variation of returns, which is here
named variety. This discussion plays an important role in risk management.
In this book, as in much of the ﬁnance literature inspired by physics, a model is typically
a set of mathematical equations that ‘ﬁt’ the data. However, in Chapter 20, Bouchaud and
Potters study how such equations may result from the behaviour of economic agents. Much

xiv
Foreword
of modern economic theory is occupied by questions of this kind, and here again physicists
have much to contribute.
This text will be extremely useful for natural scientists and engineers who want to turn
their attention to ﬁnancial data. It will also be a good source for economists interested in
getting acquainted with the very active research programme being pursued by the authors
and other physicists working with ﬁnancial data.
Jos´e A. Scheinkman
Theodore Wells ‘29 Professor of Economics, Princeton University
