Preface
Je vais maintenant commencer `a prendre toute la phynance. Apr`es quoi je tuerai tout le
monde et je m’en irai.
(A. Jarry, Ubu roi.)
Scope of the book
Finance is a rapidly expanding ﬁeld of science, with a rather unique link to applications.
Correspondingly, recent years have witnessed the growing role of ﬁnancial engineering in
market rooms. The possibility of easily accessing and processing huge quantities of data
on ﬁnancial markets opens the path to new methodologies, where systematic comparison
between theories and real data not only becomes possible, but mandatory. This perspective
has spurred the interest of the statistical physics community, with the hope that methods and
ideas developed in the past decades to deal with complex systems could also be relevant in
ﬁnance. Many holders of PhDs in physics are now taking jobs in banks or other ﬁnancial
institutions.
The existing literature roughly falls into two categories: either rather abstract books from
the mathematical ﬁnance community, which are very difﬁcult for people trained in natural
sciences to read, or more professional books, where the scientiﬁc level is often quite poor.†
Moreover, even in excellent books on the subject, such as the one by J. C. Hull, the point
of view on derivatives is the traditional one of Black and Scholes, where the whole pricing
methodology is based on the construction of riskless strategies. The idea of zero-risk is
counter-intuitive and the reason for the existence of these riskless strategies in the Black–
Scholes theory is buried in the premises of Ito’s stochastic differential rules.
Recently, a handful of books written by physicists, including the present one,‡ have tried
to ﬁll the gap by presenting the physicists’ way of approaching scientiﬁc problems. The
difference lies in priorities: the emphasis is less on rigour than on pragmatism, and no
† There are notable exceptions, such as the remarkable book by J. C. Hull, Futures, Options and Other Derivatives,
Prentice Hall, 1997, or P. Wilmott, Derivatives, The theory and practice of ﬁnancial engineering, John Wiley,
1998.
‡ See ‘Further reading’ below.

xvi
Preface
theoretical model can ever supersede empirical data. Physicists insist on a detailed compar-
ison between ‘theory’ and ‘experiments’ (i.e. empirical results, whenever available), the art
of approximations and the systematic use of intuition and simpliﬁed arguments.
Indeed, it is our belief that a more intuitive understanding of standard mathematical
theories is needed for a better training of scientists and ﬁnancial engineers in charge of
ﬁnancial risks and derivative pricing. The models discussed in Theory of Financial Risk
and Derivative Pricing aim at accounting for real markets statistics where the construction of
riskless hedges is generally impossible and where the Black–Scholes model is inadequate.
The mathematical framework required to deal with these models is however not more
complicated, and has the advantage of making the issues at stake, in particular the problem
of risk, more transparent.
Much activity is presently devoted to create and develop new methods to measure and
control ﬁnancial risks, to price derivatives and to devise decision aids for trading. We have
ourselves been involved in the construction of risk control and option pricing softwares for
major ﬁnancial institutions, and in the implementation of statistical arbitrage strategies for
the company Capital Fund Management. This book has immensely beneﬁted from the
constant interaction between theoretical models and practical issues. We hope that the
content of this book can be useful to all quants concerned with ﬁnancial risk control and
derivativepricing,bydiscussingatlengththeadvantagesandlimitationsofvariousstatistical
models and methods.
Finally, from a more academic perspective, the remarkable stability across markets and
epochs of the anomalous statistical features (fat tails, volatility clustering) revealed by the
analysis of ﬁnancial time series begs for a simple, generic explanation in terms of agent
based models. This had led in the recent years to the development of the rich and interesting
models which we discuss. Although still in their infancy, these models will become, we
believe, increasingly important in the future as they might pave the way to more ambitious
models of collective human activities.
Style and organization of the book
Despite our efforts to remain simple, certain sections are still quite technical. We have used a
smaller font to develop the more advanced ideas, which are not crucial to the understanding
of the main ideas. Whole sections marked by a star (∗) contain rather specialized material and
can be skipped at ﬁrst reading. Conversely, crucial concepts and formulae are highlighted
by ‘boxes’, either in the main text or in the summary section at the end of each chapter.
Technical terms are set in boldface when they are ﬁrst deﬁned.
We have tried to be as precise as possible, but are sometimes deliberately sloppy and non-
rigorous. For example, the idea of probability is not axiomatized: its intuitive meaning is
more than enough for the purpose of this book. The notation P(·) means the probability dis-
tribution for the variable which appears between the parentheses, and not a well-determined
function of a dummy variable. The notation x →∞does not necessarily mean that x tends
to inﬁnity in a mathematical sense, but rather that x is ‘large’. Instead of trying to derive

Preface
xvii
results which hold true in any circumstances, we often compare order of magnitudes of the
different effects: small effects are neglected, or included perturbatively.†
Finally, we have not tried to be comprehensive, and have left out a number of important
aspects of theoretical ﬁnance. For example, the problem of interest rate derivatives (swaps,
caps, swaptions. . . ) is not addressed. Correspondingly, we have not tried to give an ex-
haustive list of references, but rather, at the end of each chapter, a selection of books and
specialized papers that are directly related to the material presented in the chapter. One of
us (J.-P. B.) has been for several years an editor of the International Journal of Theoretical
and Applied Finance and of the more recent Quantitative Finance, which might explain a
certain bias in the choice of the specialized papers. Most papers that are still in e-print form
can be downloaded from http://arXiv.org/ using their reference number.
This book is divided into twenty chapters. Chapters 1–4 deal with important results in
probability theory and statistics (the central limit theorem and its limitations, the theory
of extreme value statistics, the theory of stochastic processes, etc.). Chapter 5 presents
some basic notions about ﬁnancial markets and ﬁnancial products. The statistical analysis
of real data and empirical determination of statistical laws, are discussed in Chapters 6–8.
Chapters 9–11 are concerned with the problems of inter-asset correlations (in particular in
extreme market conditions) and the deﬁnition of risk, value-at-risk and expected shortfall.
The theory of optimal portfolio, in particular in the case where the probability of extreme
risks has to be minimized, is given in Chapter 12. The problem of forward contracts and
options, their optimal hedge and the residual risk is discussed in detail in Chapters 13–15.
The standard Black–Scholes point of view is given its share in Chapter 16. Some more
advanced topics on options are introduced in Chapters 17 and 18 (such as exotic options,
the role of transaction costs and Monte–Carlo methods). The problem of the yield curve, its
theoretical description and some empirical properties are addressed in Chapter 19. Finally,
a discussion of some of the recently proposed agent based models (in particular the now
famous Minority Game) is given in Chapter 20. A short glossary of ﬁnancial terms, an index
and a list of symbols are given at the end of the book, allowing one to ﬁnd easily where
each symbol or word was used and deﬁned for the ﬁrst time.
Comparison with the previous editions
This book appeared in its ﬁrst edition in French, under the title: Th´eorie des Risques
Financiers, Al´ea–Saclay–Eyrolles, Paris (1997). The second edition (or ﬁrst English edi-
tion) was Theory of Financial Risks, Cambridge University Press (2000). Compared to this
edition, the present version has been substantially reorganized and augmented – from ﬁve
to twenty chapters, and from 220 pages to 400 pages. This results from the large amount
of new material and ideas in the past four years, but also from the desire to make the book
† a ≃b means that a is of order b, a ≪b means that a is smaller than, say, b/10. A computation neglecting terms
of order (a/b)2 is therefore accurate to 1%. Such a precision is usually enough in the ﬁnancial context, where
the uncertainty on the value of the parameters (such as the average return, the volatility, etc.), is often larger
than 1%.

xviii
Preface
more self-contained and more accessible: we have split the book in shorter chapters focus-
ing on speciﬁc topics; each of them ends with a summary of the most important points.
We have tried to give explicitly many useful formulas (probability distributions, etc.) or
practical clues (for example: how to generate random variables with a given distribution, in
Appendix F.)
Most of the ﬁgures have been redrawn, often with updated data, and quite a number of
new data analysis is presented. The discussion of many subtle points has been extended
and, hopefully, clariﬁed. We also added ‘Derivative Pricing’ in the title, since almost half
of the book covers this topic.
More speciﬁcally, we have added the following important topics:
r A speciﬁc chapter on stochastic processes, continuous time and Ito calculus, and path
integrals (see Chapter 3).
r A chapter discussing various aspects of data analysis and estimation techniques (see
Chapter 4).
r A chapter describing ﬁnancial products and ﬁnancial markets (see Chapter 5).
r An extended description of non linear correlations in ﬁnancial data (volatility clustering
and the leverage effect) and some speciﬁc mathematical models, such as the multifractal
Bacry–Muzy–Delour model or the Heston model (see Chapters 7 and 8).
r A detailed discussion of models of inter-asset correlations, multivariate statistics, clus-
tering, extreme correlations and the notion of ‘variety’ (see Chapters 9 and 11).
r A detailed discussion of the inﬂuence of drift and correlations in the dynamics of the
underlying on the pricing of options (see Chapter 15).
r A whole chapter on the Black-Scholes way, with an account of the standard formulae (see
Chapter 16).
r A new chapter on Monte-Carlo methods for pricing and hedging options (see Chapter 18).
r A chapter on the theory of the yield curve, explaining in (hopefully) transparent terms
the Vasicek and Heath–Jarrow–Morton models and comparing their predictions with
empirical data. (See Chapter 19, which contains some material that was not previously
published.)
r A whole chapter on herding, feedback and agent based models, most notably the minority
game (see Chapter 20).
Many chapters now contain some new material that have never appeared in press before
(in particular in Chapters 7, 9, 11 and 19). Several more minor topics have been included
or developed, such as the theory of progressive dominance of extremes (Section 2.4), the
anomalous time evolution of ‘hypercumulants’ (Section 7.2.1), the theory of optimal portfo-
lios with non linear constraints (Section 12.2.2), the ‘worst ﬂuctuation’ method to estimate
the value-at-risk of complex portfolios (Section 12.4) and the theory of value-at-risk hedging
(Section 14.5).
We hope that on the whole, this clariﬁed and extended edition will be of interest both to
newcomers and to those already acquainted with the previous edition of our book.

Preface
xix
Acknowledgements†
This book owes much to discussions that we had with our colleagues and friends at Science
and Finance/CFM: Jelle Boersma, Laurent Laloux, Andrew Matacz, and Philip Seager. We
want to thank in particular Jean-Pierre Aguilar, who introduced us to the reality of ﬁnancial
markets, suggested many improvements, and supported us during the many years that this
project took to complete.
We also had many fruitful exchanges over the years with Alain Arn´eodo, Erik Aurell,
Marco Avellaneda, Elie Ayache, Belal Baaquie, Emmanuel Bacry, Fran¸cois Bardou, Martin
Baxter, Lisa Borland, Damien Challet, Pierre Cizeau, Rama Cont, Lorenzo Cornalba,
Michel Dacorogna, Michael Dempster, Nicole El Karoui, J. Doyne Farmer, Xavier Gabaix,
Stefano Galluccio, Irene Giardina, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Philippe Henrotte, Giulia
Iori, David Jeammet, Paul Jefferies, Neil Johnson, Hagen Kleinert, Imre Kondor, Jean-
Michel Lasry, Thomas Lux, Rosario Mantegna,‡ Matteo Marsili, Marc M´ezard, Martin
Meyer, Aubry Miens, Jeff Miller, Jean-Fran¸cois Muzy, Vivienne Plerou, Benoˆıt Pochart,
Bernd Rosenow, Nicolas Sagna, Jos´e Scheinkman, Farhat Selmi, Dragan ˇSestovi´c, Jim
Sethna, Didier Sornette, Gene Stanley, Dietrich Stauffer, Ray Streater, Nassim Taleb, Robert
Tompkins, Johaness Vo¨ıt, Christian Walter, Mark Wexler, Paul Wilmott, Matthieu Wyart,
Tom Wynter and Karol ˙Zyczkowski.
We thank Claude Godr`eche, who was the editor for the French version of this book, and
Simon Capelin, in charge of the two English editions at C.U.P., for their friendly advice
and support, and Jos´e Scheinkman for kindly accepting to write a foreword. M. P. wishes to
thank Karin Badt for not allowing any compromises in the search for higher truths. J.-P. B.
wants to thank J. Hammann and all his colleagues from Saclay and elsewhere for providing
such a free and stimulating scientiﬁc atmosphere, and Elisabeth Bouchaud for having shared
so many far more important things.
This book is dedicated to our families and children and, more particularly, to the memory
of Paul Potters.
Further reading
r Econophysics and ‘phynance’
J. Baschnagel, W. Paul, Stochastic Processes, From Physics to Finance, Springer-Verlag, 2000.
J.-P. Bouchaud, K. Lauritsen, P. Alstrom (Edts), Proceedings of “Applications of Physics in Financial
Analysis”, held in Dublin (1999), Int. J. Theo. Appl. Fin., 3, (2000).
J.-P. Bouchaud, M. Marsili, B. Roehner, F. Slanina (Edts), Proceedings of the Prague Conference on
Application of Physics to Economic Modelling, Physica A, 299, (2001).
A. Bunde, H.-J. Schellnhuber, J. Kropp (Edts), The Science of Disaster, Springer-Verlag, 2002.
J. D. Farmer, Physicists attempt to scale the ivory towers of ﬁnance, in Computing in Science and
Engineering, November 1999, reprinted in Int. J. Theo. Appl. Fin., 3, 311 (2000).
† Funding for this work was made available in part by market inefﬁciencies.
‡ Who kindly gave us the permission to reproduce three of his graphs.

xx
Preface
M. Levy, H. Levy, S. Solomon, Microscopic Simulation of Financial Markets, Academic Press,
San Diego, 2000.
R. Mantegna, H. E. Stanley, An Introduction to Econophysics, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1999.
B. Roehner, Patterns of Speculation: A Study in Observational Econophysics, Cambridge University
Press, 2002.
J. Vo¨ıt, The Statistical Mechanics of Financial Markets, Springer-Verlag, 2001.
