4
Analysis of empirical data
Les lois g´en´erales de la nature sont un ensemble d’exceptions non exceptionnelles, et,
par cons´equent, sans aucun int´erˆet; l’exception exceptionnelle seule ayant un int´erˆet.†
(Alfred Jarry)
4.1 Estimating probability distributions
4.1.1 Cumulative distribution and densities – rank histogram
Imagine that one observes a series of N realizations of the random iid variable X,
{x1, x2, . . . , xN}, drawn from an unknown source of which one would like to determine
either its distribution density or its cumulative distribution. To determine the distribution
density using empirical data, one has to choose a certain width w for the bins to con-
struct frequency histograms. Another possibility is to smooth the data using, for example,
a Gaussian with a certain width w. More precisely, an estimate of the probability density
P(x) can be obtained by computing:
P(x) =
1
N
√
2πw2
N

k=1
exp

−(xk −x)2
2w2

.
(4.1)
(Note that by construction

P(x)dx = 1.) Even when the width w is carefully chosen,
part of the information is lost. It is furthermore difﬁcult to characterize the tails of the
distribution, corresponding to rare events, since most bins in this region are empty – one
should in principle choose a position dependent bin width w(x) to account for the rarefaction
of events in the tails.
On the other hand, the construction of the cumulative distribution does not require to
choose a bin width. The trick is to order the observed data according to their values, for
example in decreasing order. The value xk of the kth variable (out of N) is then such that:
P>(xk) =
k
N + 1.
(4.2)
† The laws of nature are a collection of non exceptional exceptions, and therefore devoid of interest. Only
exceptional exceptions are genuinely interesting.

56
Analysis of empirical data
This result comes from the following observation: if one were to draw an (N + 1)th random
variable from the same distribution, this new variable would have a probability 1/(N + 1)
of being the largest, a probability 1/(N + 1) of being the second largest, and so forth. In
other words, there is an a priori equal probability 1/(N + 1) that it would fall within any of
the N + 1 intervals deﬁned by the previously drawn variables. The probability that it would
fall above the kth one, xk is therefore equal to the number of intervals beyond xk, which
is equal to k, times 1/N + 1. This is also equal, by deﬁnition, to P>(xk), hence Eq. (4.2).
Unfortunately in this construction, we do not have an empirical value for P>(x) when x
is not one of the N observed points, we must therefore interpolate the distribution on the
intermediate points.
Another approach is to make the hypothesis that the observed values were equally prob-
able and that the unobserved values have zero probability, hence
P(x) = 1
N
N

k=1
δ(xk −x),
(4.3)
which can be though as the limit w →0 of Eq. (4.1). In this construction P>(x) is ill-deﬁned
for the points {xk} and is piecewise constant everywhere else,
P>(x) = k
N
for
xk < x < xk+1.
(4.4)
Yet another, slightly different way to state this is to notice that, for large N, the most probable
value ∗[k] of xk is such that P>(∗[k]) = k/N: see also the discussion in Section 2.1,
and Eq. (2.12).
Since the rare event part of the distribution is of particular interest, it is convenient to
choose a logarithmic scale for the probabilities. Furthermore, in order to check visually
the symmetry of the probability distributions, we have in the following systematically used
P<(−δx) for the negative increments, and P>(δx) for positive δx.
4.1.2 Kolmogorov–Smirnov test
Once the empirical cumulative distribution is determined, one usually tries to ﬁnd a math-
ematical distribution which reproduces as accurately as possible the empirical data. An
interesting measure of the goodness of the ﬁt is provided by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test. Let P>,e(x) be the empirical distribution obtained using the second rank ordering
technique above, Eq. (4.4). This function jumps by an amount 1/N every time a data point
is encountered, and is constant otherwise. Now, let P>,th(x) be the theoretical cumulative
distribution to be tested. Kolmogorov and Smirnov deﬁne the distance D between the two
distributions as the maximum value of their absolute difference:
D = max
x
|P>,th(x) −P>,e(x)|.
(4.5)
Since P>,th(x) is monotone, this maximum is reached for a value of x = xk belonging to
the data set. Imagine that the data points are indeed chosen according to the theoretical

4.1 Estimating probability distributions
57
distribution P>,th(x). The distance D is then a random quantity that depends on the actual
series of xk, but the distribution of D is exactly known when N is large and is, remarkably,
totally independent of the shape of P>,th(x)! The cumulative distribution of D is given by:
P>(D) = QK S(
√
N D)
QK S(u) = 2
∞

n=1
(−1)n−1 exp(−2n2u2).
(4.6)
This formula means that if P>,th(x) is the correct distribution, then the distance D between
the empirical cumulative distribution and the theoretical distribution should decay for large
N as u/
√
N, where the random variable u has a known distribution, QK S. In practice,
one computes from the data the quantity D from which one deduces, using Eq. (4.6), the
probability P>(D). If this number is found to be small, say 0.01, then the hypothesis that
the two distributions are the same is very unlikely: the hypothesis can be rejected with 99%
conﬁdence.
Note that one can also compare two empirical distributions using the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test, without knowing the true distribution of any of them. This is very interesting
for ﬁnancial applications. One can ask whether the distribution of returns in a given period
of time (say during the year 1999) is or is not the same as the distribution of returns the
following year (2000). In this case, one constructs the distance D as:
D = max
x
|P>,e1(x) −P>,e2(x)|,
(4.7)
where the index 1, 2 refers to the two samples, of sizes N1 and N2. The cumulative distri-
bution of D is now given by:
P>(D) = QK S

N1N2
N1 + N2
D

.
(4.8)
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is interesting because it gives universal answers, inde-
pendent of the shape of the tested distributions. However, this test, as any other, has its
weaknesses. In particular, it is clear that by construction, |P>,th(x) −P>,e(x)| is zero for
x →±∞since in these cases, both quantities tend to 0 or 1. Therefore, the value of x that
maximizes this difference is generically around the median, and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test is not very sensitive to the quality of the ﬁt in the tails – a potentially crucial region. It
is thus interesting to look for other goodness of ﬁt criteria.
4.1.3 Maximum likelihood
Suppose that Pλ(x) denotes a family of probability distribution parametrized by one or
several parameters, collectively noted λ. The a priori probability to observe the particular
series {x1, x2, . . . , xN} chosen according to Pλ(x) is proportional to:
Pλ(x1)Pλ(x2) . . . Pλ(xN).
(4.9)

58
Analysis of empirical data
The most likely value λ∗of λ is such that this a priori probability is maximized. Taking for
example:
r Pλ(x) to be a Gaussian distribution of mean m and variance σ 2, one ﬁnds that the most
likely values of m and σ 2 are, respectively, the empirical mean and variance of the data
points. Indeed, the likelihood reads:
Pλ(x1)Pλ(x2) . . . Pλ(xN) = e−N
2 log(2πσ 2)−
1
2σ2
N
k=1(xk−m)2.
(4.10)
Maximizing the term in the exponential with respect to m and σ 2, one ﬁnds:
N

i=1
(xk −m) = 0
and
N
σ 2 −1
σ 4
N

i=1
(xk −m)2 = 0,
(4.11)
which leads to the announced result.
r Pλ(x) to be a power-law distribution:
Pλ(x) = µxµ
0
x1+µ
x > x0,
(4.12)
(with x0 known), one has:
Pλ(x1)Pλ(x2) . . . Pλ(xN) = eN log µ+Nµ log x0−(1+µ) N
k=1 log xk.
(4.13)
The equation ﬁxing µ∗is thus, in this case:
N
µ∗+ N log x0 −
N

k=1
log xk = 0 ⇒µ∗=
N
N
k=1 log(xk/x0)
.
(4.14)
In the above example, if x0 is unknown, its most likely value is simply given by: x0 =
min{x1, x2, . . . , xN}. A related topic is the so-called Hill estimator for power-law tails. If
one assumes that the random variable that one observes has power-law tails beyond a certain
(unknown) value x0, one can use the maximum likelihood estimator of µ = µ∗given above
using only the points exceeding the value x0. This means that one only uses the rank ordered
points xk with k ≤k∗such that xk∗+1 > x0, and obtains:
µ∗(k∗) =
k∗
k∗
k=1 log(xk/xk∗)
.
(4.15)
This quantity, plotted as a function of k∗, should reveal a plateau region for k∗≫1, corre-
sponding to the power-law regime of the distribution. We show in Figure 4.1 the quantity
µ∗(k∗) for the Student distribution with µ = 3, using 1000 points. This estimator indeed
wanders (with rather large oscillations) around the value µ = 3 before going astray when
one reaches the core of the Student distribution, where the asymptotic power-law ceases
to hold. A nicer looking estimate is obtained by averaging the previous estimator over a
certain range of k∗.

4.1 Estimating probability distributions
59
0
2
4
6
0
 xk*
2
3
4
 µ
Positive tail
Negative tail
10
8
Fig. 4.1. Hill estimator µ∗(k∗) as a function of xk∗for a 1000 point sample of a µ = 3 Student
distribution. The two curves corresponds to the left and right tail. Note that for small x one leaves
the tail region. The plain horizontal line is the expected value µ = 3.
4.1.4 Relative likelihood
When the most likely value of the parameter is determined, one can assess the likelihood
of the proposed distribution Pλ∗(x), equal to 	N
i=1(Pλ∗(xi)dx), or more interestingly the
log-likelihood per point L (up to an additive constant involving dx):
L = 1
N
N

k=1
log Pλ∗(xk).
(4.16)
This quantity is, for large N, equal to:
L =

P(x) log Pλ∗(x)dx,
(4.17)
where P(x) is the ‘true’ probability. If Pλ∗(x) is indeed a good approximation to P(x), then
the log likelihood per point is precisely minus the entropy of Pλ∗(x). Note that the log-
likelihood per point of the optimal Gaussian distribution is always equal to LG = −1.419
(for σ = 1), independently of P – see Eq. (2.28).
However, the log-likelihood per point has no intrinsic meaning, due to the additive con-
stant that we swept under the rug above. In particular, a mere change of variables y = f (x)
changes the value of L. On the other hand, the difference of log-likelihood for two com-
peting distributions for the same data set is meaningful and invariant under a change of
variable. If these two distributions are a priori equally likely, then the probability that the
data is drawn from the distribution P∗
1 rather than from P∗
2 is equal to exp N(L1 −L2).

60
Analysis of empirical data
4.1.5 A general caveat
Although of genuine interest, statistical tests, such as the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test or the maximum likelihood method discussed above, usually provide a single
number as a measure of the goodness of ﬁt. This is in general dangerous since it
does not give much information about where the ﬁt is good, and where it is not so
good.
As mentioned above, a theoretical distribution can pass the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
but be very bad in the tails. This is why the quality of a ﬁt should always be assessed using
a joint graphical representation of the data and of the theoretical ﬁt, using different ways of
plotting the data (log-log, linear-log, etc.) to emphasize different parts of the distribution.
This procedure, although not systematic, allows one to spot obvious errors and to track
systematic effects, and is often of great pragmatic value. For example, one can always ﬁt
the distribution of ﬁnancial returns using L´evy stable distributions. The maximum likelihood
method willprovide a setofoptimalparameters, andindeedL´evystabledistributionsusually
provide a good ﬁt in the core region of empirical distributions. However, graphing the data
in log-log coordinates soon reveals that the essence of L´evy stable distributions, namely
the power-law tails with an exponent µ < 2, accounts very badly for the empirical tails. It
is rather surprising that the use of graphical representation is so rarely used in econometric
literature, where tables of numbers, giving the results of statistical tests, are preferred.
This state of matters strongly contrasts with what happens in physics, where a graphical
assessment of a theory is often considered to be most relevant, and helps in discussing the
limitations of a given model.
4.2 Empirical moments: estimation and error
4.2.1 Empirical mean
Consider the empirical mean of the series of iid random variables {x1, x2, . . . , xN}, given by
me = 
k xk/N. The standard error on me, noted me, deﬁned by the standard deviation
of me, is easy to compute. One ﬁnds:
me =
σ
√
N
,
(4.18)
where σ is the theoretical variance of the random variable X. As is well known, the error on
the mean goes to zero as the square root of the system size. This assumes that the variables
are independent. Correlations slow down the convergence to the true mean, sometimes by
changing N into a reduced number of effectively independent random variables, sometimes
by even changing the power 1/2 into a smaller power.

4.2 Empirical moments: estimation and error
61
4.2.2 Empirical variance and MAD
Similarly, the error on the empirical variance (σ 2
e ) can be computed as its standard devi-
ation across different samples. One ﬁnds, for large N:



σ 2
e
2 = ⟨x4⟩−⟨x2⟩2
N
= σ 2
N (2 + κ),
(4.19)
where κ is the kurtosis of P(x). Therefore, provided κ is ﬁnite, the relative error on the
variance (and hence on the standard deviation) also decays as 1/
√
N. When the kurtosis is
inﬁnite, the above formula is meaningless: another measure of the error, such as the width
of the variance distribution, must be used. Note that from the above formula, the error on
the standard deviation is given by:
σe
σ
=
1
2
√
N
√
2 + κ ≈
1
√
2N

1 + 1
4κ

,
(4.20)
where the last expression holds for small κ. It is interesting to compare the above result on
the variance error to that on the mean absolute deviation Eabs. The mean square error on
this quantity reads:
[Eabs,e]2 = 1
N

σ 2 −E2
abs

.
(4.21)
In order to make sense of this formula and compare it to the error on the standard deviation
computed just above, we will use the small kurtosis expansion explained in Section 2.3.3,
according to which Eabs = ⟨|x|⟩= √2/π(1 −κ/24)σ. Plugging in this expression, we ﬁnd
that the relative error on the MAD reads:
Eabs,e
Eabs
=

π −2
2N

1 +
π
24(π −2)κ

.
(4.22)
One therefore ﬁnds that the relative error on the MAD in the Gaussian case (κ = 0) is 7%
larger than that on the standard deviation, but the latter grows faster with the kurtosis than
the MAD, which is less sensitive to tail events and therefore a more robust estimator in the
presence of tail events.
4.2.3 Empirical kurtosis
One can similarly estimate the error on the kurtosis. Not surprisingly, this error can be
expressed in terms of the eighth moment of the distribution (!). Even in the best case, when
X is a Gaussian variable, the error on the empirical kurtosis is as large as √96/N.
4.2.4 Error on the volatility
Suppose that one observes the time series of a random variable X obtained by summing iid
random increments δX. The total number of increments is N. The variable X is observed on a
certain coarse time resolution M (say one day for ﬁnancial applications), so that the statistics

62
Analysis of empirical data
of the coarse grained increments x(k+1)M −xkM can be studied using N/M different values.
The volatility of the process on scale M is the standard deviation of these increments.
Therefore, using the above results, the error on the volatility on scale M using N/M data
points, is √2 + κM/2√N/M, where κM is the kurtosis on scale M. This formula suggests
at ﬁrst sight that the volatility would be more precisely determined if N/M was increased,
i.e. if the process was observed at higher frequencies. However, since the increments are
iid, the kurtosis κM on scale M is κ1/M. Therefore, the error on the volatility as a function
of the observation scale M ﬁnally reads:
σe
σe
=
1
2
√
N

2M + κ1.
(4.23)
Hence, the error on the volatility can be indeed made very small for a Gaussian process for
which κ1 = 0, by going to higher and higher frequencies (M →1). In the continuous time
limit, one can in principle determine the volatility of the process with arbitrary precision.
This is yet another aspect of the Ito formula. However, in the case of a kurtic process, the
precision saturates and high frequency data does not add much as soon as M ≤κ1.
4.3 Correlograms and variograms
4.3.1 Variogram
Consider a certain stationary process {x1, x2, . . . , xN}. A natural question to ask is: how ‘far’
does the process typically escape from itself between times k and k + ℓ? This propensity
to move can be quantiﬁed by the variance of the difference xk+ℓ−xk:
V(ℓ) ≡⟨(xk+ℓ−xk)2⟩,
(4.24)
which is called in this context the variogram of the process. Empirically, this quantity is
simply obtained by computing the variance of the difference of all data points separated by
a time lag ℓ. If the process is a random walk, the variogram V(ℓ) grows linearly with ℓ, with
a coefﬁcient which is the square volatility of the increments. If the series {x1, x2, . . . , xN}
is made of iid random variables, the variogram is independent of ℓ(as soon as ℓ̸= 0), and
equal to twice the variance of these variables. An interesting intermediate situation is that
of mean reverting processes, such that xk+1 = αxk + ξk, where α ≤1 and ξk are iid random
variables of variance σ 2. For α = 1, this is a random walk, whereas for α = 0, the x’s
are themselves iid random variables, identical to the ξ’s. Suppose that x0 = 0; the explicit
solution of the above recursion relation is xk = k−1
k′=0 αk−1−k′ξk′, from which the variogram
is easily computed. In the limit k →∞where the process becomes stationary, one ﬁnds:
V(ℓ) = 2σ 2 1 −αℓ
1 −α2 .
(4.25)
The limit α = 1 must be taken carefully to recover the random walk result σ 2ℓ. Setting
α = 1 −ϵ in the above expression, one ﬁnds, for ϵ ≪1:
V(ℓ) = σ 2
ϵ (1 −e−ϵℓ).
(4.26)

4.3 Correlograms and variograms
63
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
0.5
1
v( )
σ
2l
σ
2/ε
0
20
40
60
80
100
l
-1
0
1
2
x
v( )
2
σ
2l
σ
2/ε
Fig. 4.2. Variogram of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (top). The dotted line shows the short time
linear behaviour, where the process is similar to a random walk with independent increments. The
dashed line indicates the long term asymptotic value corresponding to independent random numbers.
The bottom graph shows a realization of this process with the same correlation time (20 steps).
This is the variogram of a so-called Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. When ℓis much smaller
than the correlation time 1/ϵ, one ﬁnds, as expected, the random walk result V(ℓ) = σ 2ℓ,
whereas for ℓ≫1/ϵ, the variogram saturates at σ 2/ϵ (Fig. 4.2). On very large time scales,
the variogram is therefore ﬂat.
4.3.2 Correlogram
A related, well known quantity is the correlation function of the variables xk. If the average
value ⟨x⟩of xk is well deﬁned, the correlation function (or correlogram) is deﬁned as:
C(ℓ) = ⟨xk+ℓxk⟩−⟨x⟩2.
(4.27)
Simple manipulations then show that:
V(ℓ) = 2 (C(0) −C(ℓ)) .
(4.28)
However, in many cases, the average value of x is undeﬁned (for example in the case of a
random walk), or difﬁcult to measure because when the correlation time is large, it is hard
to know whether the process diffuses away to inﬁnity or remains bounded (this is the case,
for example, of the time series of volatility of ﬁnancial assets). In these cases, it is much
better to use the variogram to characterize the ﬂuctuations of the process, since this quantity
does not require the knowledge of ⟨x⟩. Another caveat concerning the empirical correlation
function when the correlation time is somewhat large is the following. From the data, one

64
Analysis of empirical data
computes C(ℓ) as:
Ce(ℓ) =
1
N −ℓ
N−ℓ

k=1
˜xk ˜xk+ℓ
(4.29)
with
˜xk = xk −1
N
N

k=1
˜xk.
(4.30)
From this deﬁnition, one ﬁnds the following exact sum rule:
N

ℓ=0

1 −ℓ
N

Ce(ℓ) = 0
(4.31)
Assume now that the true correlation time ℓ0 is large compared to one and not very small
compared to the total sample size N. The theoretical value of the left hand side should
be of the order of σ 2ℓ0. The above sum rule can only be satisﬁed in this case by having
an empirical correlation function slightly negative when ℓis a fraction of N, whereas the
true correlation function should still be positive if ℓ0 is large. Therefore, spurious anti-
correlations are generated in this procedure.
4.3.3 Hurst exponent
Another interesting way to characterize the temporal development of the ﬂuctuations is to
study a quantity of direct relevance in ﬁnancial applications, that measures the average span
of the ﬂuctuations. Following Hurst, one can deﬁne the average distance between the ‘high’
and the ‘low’ in a window of size t = ℓτ:†
H(ℓ) = ⟨max(xk)k=n+1,n+ℓ−min(xk)k=n+1,n+ℓ⟩n.
(4.32)
The Hurst exponent H is deﬁned from H(ℓ) ∝ℓH. In the case where the increments δX are
Gaussian, one ﬁnds that H ≡1
2 (for large ℓ). In the case of a TLD distribution of increments
of index 1 < µ < 2, one ﬁnds (see the discussion in Section 2.3.6):
H(ℓ) ∝Aℓ
1
µ
(ℓ≪N ∗);
H(ℓ) ∝
√
Dτℓ
(ℓ≫N ∗).
(4.33)
The Hurst exponent therefore evolves from an anomalously high value H = 1/µ to the
‘normal’ value H = 1
2 as ℓincreases.
Finally, for a fractional Brownian motion (deﬁned in Section 2.5), one ﬁnds that
H = 1 −ν/2. In this case, the variogram also grows as V(ℓ) ∝ℓ1−ν/2.
4.3.4 Correlations across different time zones
An effect that can be very important for risk management is the existence of non triv-
ial correlations between different time zones. For example, there is a signiﬁcant positive
† Note however that H(ℓ) is different form the ‘R/S statistics’ considered by Hurst. The difference lies in an
ℓ-dependent normalization, which in some cases can change the scaling with ℓ.

4.3 Correlograms and variograms
65
Table 4.1. Same day variance and covariance (in %2 per
day). Data from July 1, 1999 to June 30, 2002.
S&P 500
FTSE 100
Nikkei 225
S&P 500
1.62
0.64
0.23
FTSE 100
1.40
0.33
Nikkei 225
2.31
Table 4.2. Covariance between t and t + 1 day (in %2
per day). Data from July 1, 1999 to June 30, 2002.
Numbers in boldface are statistically signiﬁcant.
S&P 500
FTSE 100
Nikkei 225
S&P 500 (t + 1)
0.01
0.02
−0.06
FTSE 100 (t + 1)
0.42
−0.01
−0.10
Nikkei 225 (t + 1)
0.67
0.54
−0.06
correlation between the U.S. market on day t and the European and Japanese markets on
day t + 1, as shown in Table 4.2. This correlation can be strong: in the case of the Nikkei
and the S&P 500, it is stronger between consecutive days than for the same (calendar)
day. After a market closes, other world markets continue trading, taking into account (and
generating) new information. For the closed market, this new information is only reﬂected
in the opening price of the next day, generating a correlation between the returns of “late”
markets and next day returns of “early” markets. On the other hand, the serial correlations
of a (single time-zone) index with itself is very small. In the case of the S&P 500, one ﬁnds
ρ(t, t + 1) = 0.006 for the period considered, with a standard error on this number of 0.03.
Due to these correlations across time zones, multi-time zone indices such as the MSCI
world index can have signiﬁcant serial correlations. On the same period, these correlations
are found to be as large as 0.18 between two consecutive days.
These correlations are also important when one estimates the risk of a portfolio. The
relevant quantities are not so much the daily variances and covariances but rather the
variances and covariances of longer time scale (month, year). These can be estimated using
daily data:
x ≡
N

k=1
δxk
y ≡
N

k=1
δyk
(4.34)
⟨xy⟩=
N

k,ℓ=1
⟨δxkδyℓ⟩
= N ⟨δx0δy0⟩+ (N −1) (⟨δx0δy1⟩+ ⟨δx1δy0⟩) + . . .
≈N (⟨δx0δy0⟩+ ⟨δx0δy1⟩+ ⟨δx1δy0⟩) .

66
Analysis of empirical data
One sees that the correlations between assets is increased by the presence of this time zone
effect. To correctly account for correlations between assets in different time-zones, one
should add to the daily covariance (⟨δx0δy0⟩) the sum of the one-day-lagged covariances
(⟨δx0δy1⟩+ ⟨δx1δy0⟩). This modiﬁed covariance can then be used to compute properly
annualized variances. The same formula should also be used to compute the variance of a
multi-time zone index or portfolio. In this case the two cross terms are equal and one should
add 2 ⟨δx0δx1⟩to the daily variance (⟨δx0δx0⟩). Failing to use formula (4.34) can greatly
underestimate the annualized standard deviation of a world index or portfolio. In the case of
the MSCI world index, the above formula leads to a annualized volatility of 17.6%, instead
of 15.1% when neglecting the ‘retarded’ term.
4.4 Data with heterogeneous volatilities
Let us end this chapter on empirical data analysis by commenting on the problem of data
sets with different volatilities, that very frequently occurs in ﬁnancial analysis. Suppose
for example that one studies the time series of different stocks, each one with a different
volatility σi, with the expectation that the returns of these different stocks have the same
distribution, up to a rescaling factor. In other words, one assumes that the return ηi(k) of
stock i at time k can be written as:
ηi(k) = σiξi(k),
(4.35)
where σi is the volatility of stock i and ξi(k) are random variables of unit variance, with a
common distribution for all i’s that one would like to determine. A similar situation would
be that of a single asset when its volatility changes over time.
The naive way to proceed would be to rescale the empirical return ηi(k) by the empirical
volatility of stock i, i.e. to deﬁne scaled returns as:
ˆξi(k) =
√
Nηi(k)
N
k′=1(ηi(k′))2
,
(4.36)
where N is the common size of the time series and we have assumed that the empirical
mean can be neglected. This deﬁnition however leads to a systematic underestimation of
the tails of the distribution of the ξ’s, which is obvious from the above deﬁnition, since even
when one of the ηi(k) is very large, ˆξi(k) is bounded by
√
N, because the same large ηi(k)
also contributes to the empirical variance.
A trick to get rid of this effect is to remove the contribution of ηi(k) itself form the
variance, and to deﬁne new rescaled variables as:†
˜ξi(k) =
√
N −1ηi(k)
N
k′=1,k′̸=k(ηi(k′))2
.
(4.37)
† This trick is due to Martin Meyer, and was used in V. Plerou et al. (1999) to determine the distribution of returns
of a large pool of stocks.

4.5 Summary
67
1
10
100
k
1
10
xk
excluded
included
exact distribution
Fig. 4.3. Rank histogram of µ = 3 Student variables, rescaled naively as in (4.36), or following the
trick (4.37). The naive rescaling severely truncates the true tails, which are correctly captured using
the ˜ξ variables.
This trick is illustrated in Figure 4.3, where M = 400 samples of N = 100 random variables
are drawn according to a µ = 3 Student distribution. The rank histogram of the naively
scaled variables ˆξi(k) bends down for high ranks, and saturates around
√
N = 10, whereas
the rank histogram of the ˜ξi(k) does indeed perfectly follow the expected behaviour of
the µ = 3 tail. Note however that the variance of ˜ξi(k) is positively biased by an amount
proportional to 1/N.
4.5 Summary
r This chapter offers guidelines useful for analyzing ﬁnancial data: how to ﬁt a proba-
bility distribution, determine an empirical variance, or a correlation function.
r The relative error on the mean, MAD, RMS, skewness and kurtosis of a distribution
decreases like 1/
√
N (whenever higher moments of the distribution exist), but the
prefactor can be quite large for high empirical moments (variance, fourth moment),
especially when the true distribution is non-Gaussian.
r An important point is made in Section 4.1.5: although of genuine interest, statis-
tical tests usually provide only a single measure of the goodness of ﬁt. This is
generally dangerous, as it does not give much information about where the ﬁt is
good, and where it is not so good. Representing the data graphically allows one to
spot obvious errors and to track systematic effects, and is often of great pragmatic
value.

68
Analysis of empirical data
r Further reading
W. T. Vetterling, S. A. Teukolsky, W. H. Press, B. P. Flannery, Numerical recipes in C: the art of
scientiﬁc computing, Cambridge University Press, 1993.
r Specialized papers
B. Hill, A simple general approach to inference about the tail of a distribution, Ann. Stat. 3, 1163
(1975).
V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, L. A. Amaral, M. Meyer, H. E. Stanley, Scaling of the distribution of price
ﬂuctuations of individual companies, Phys. Rev., E 60, 6519 (1999).
