5
Financial products and ﬁnancial markets
We should not be content to have the salesman stand between us – the salesman who
knows nothing of what he is selling save that he is charging a great deal too much for it.
(Oscar Wilde, House Decoration.)
5.1 Introduction
This chapter takes on ﬁnance. The ﬁrst part offers an overview of the major products in
modern ﬁnance. It describes some of the possible complex characteristics of each of these
products,andsuggeststricksonhowtotaketheseparticularitiesintoaccountindataanalysis.
The second part of the chapter turns to the practical functioning of ﬁnancial markets: who are
the players who buy and sell, and how are the markets organized. This chapter is essentially a
source of deﬁnitions and references, covering the basic knowledge necessary to understand
our book as a whole, knowledge familiar to practitioners in ﬁnance, but perhaps new to
people outside the ﬁeld. More details on the all the subjects alluded to in this chapter can
be found in standard textbooks (see further reading at the end of the chapter).
5.2 Financial products
5.2.1 Cash (Interbank market)
Putting cash in the bank is the simplest form of investment. Banks pay interest rates on
deposits as well as charge interest rates on loans. Interest is paid at the end of a given
period, quoted in annual rate, although actual deposits and loans can have any lifetime.
Rate conventions determine how the annual interest rate relates to the actual payment for
the given time period. The most common rate convention is the actual/360. According to
this convention, the amount of interest to be paid is equal to P × rT/360 where P is the
‘principal’, r the annual rate, and T the number of calendar days (including week-ends
and holidays) of the deposit/loan. Other conventions differ according to how the calendar
is deﬁned: 30/360, for example, differs from actual/360 in that it assumes all months to
have thirty days, whereas the latter takes into account the exact number of investment
days.

70
Financial products and ﬁnancial markets
Table 5.1. Libor rates for selected currencies and maturities on
October 3, 2002.
Maturity
EUR
USD
JPY
GBP
Overnight
3.30%
1.77%
0.05%
3.97%
1 month
3.30%
1.80%
0.05%
3.95%
12 months
3.05%
1.70%
0.10%
3.97%
Reference services exist to inform customers of the daily standard interest rate. The most
popular source is Libor (the London interbank offered rate) published by the BBA (British
banker’s association) every day at 11am London time. Libor is the standard interest rate for
different currencies and different maturities (the varying investment lifetimes), which the
BBA calculates based on up to 16 banks average after removing top and bottom quartile;
see Table 5.1. In this calculation, the BBA uses the actual/360 convention rate, or, in the
case of GBP, the actual/365. An alternative reference source, speciﬁc to the Euro currency,
is the Euribor by EBF (European banking federation), which calculates its standard by
surveying over 50 banks, also using the actual/360. Note that interest rates are quoted in
percents. When comparing interest rates, comparisons are made in fractions of a percent,
the difference is calculated in basis points, or bp. One basis point is equal to 0.01 % (10−4);
for example a .07 % difference in interest rate is a 7 basis point difference.
Rates are either given as yield rates, that apply to a loan starting now until a given expiry
date, as in Table 5.1, but can also be described in terms of forward rates. A forward rate
is the rate for a loan starting in the future, for a given period of time (typically 3 months).
For example, the 1 year forward rate is the rate for a loan starting in a year from now, and
that will expire in 1 year and 3 months. More details on forward rates and on their relation
with the yield rates are given in Chapter 19.
There are seasonality effects in interest rates. The most striking one is that overnight
interest rates can become very high over the end of the year. This then makes all forward
rates higher if they include the year-end period. For example December Eurodollar and
Euribor contracts are always lower (corresponding to higher rates) than the interpolation
between the September and March contracts. Corporations and banks are reluctant to lend
money over the year-end for balance sheet purpose.
Interest rates are linked with currencies but not with countries. It is possible to arbitrage
a difference in interest rates in the same currency: borrow at the low rate and lend at the
high rate. This operation carries a counterparty risk but no ﬁnancial risk if the maturity
of the loan and the deposit are the same. If the two rates are not in the same currency, then
the above arbitrage is no longer risk free. If one borrows yen (low interest rates), converts
the sum to British pound and makes a deposit (high rate), there is a risk that at the end of the
period the yen has increased in value, creating a loss potentially greater than the gain from
the interest rate difference.
Conversely, one has to take into account the difference in interest rates between the two
traded currencies. For example a speculative bet that currency A will depreciate with respect

5.2 Financial products
71
to currency B can be offset by the higher interest rates for loans in currency A respective
to B.
5.2.2 Stocks
Companies with more than one owner are broken down into stocks (or shares) which
represent a fractional ownership of a company. Generally speaking, the terms “stocks” and
“shares” are subsumed under the term equity. In a public company, equity can be bought
and sold freely in the ﬁnancial markets, whereas in a private company one must contact
the owners directly, and the transaction might be governed (or ruled impossible) by private
ownership rules. As no data is available on private companies, this book deals exclusively
with shares of public companies.
Sometimes more than one type of share is available for a given company. They might
differ in voting rights or dividend. For example, preferred stocks differ from common
stocks in that they are entitled to a ﬁxed dividend that must be paid ﬁrst if the company pays
dividend. Preferred shares also have precedence over common shares in case the company is
liquidated. On the other hand, common shares can receive an unlimited amount of dividends
and carry voting rights.
A company that makes a proﬁt can do one of two things, either reinvest the proﬁt (build
up infrastructure, buy other companies, etc.) or return the proﬁt to its owners in the form of
dividend payments. Companies that pay dividends do so regularly, the standard frequency
varying from country to country (e.g., quarterly in the US, annually in Italy). Since share-
holders of a publicly traded company change constantly, a mechanism exists to determine
who will receive the next dividend, the seller or the buyer. Hence we have the ex-dividend
date: on this date, the stock is traded without the dividend right. In other words, on or after
this date, the new buyer has no claim to the upcoming dividend, and whoever owned the
stock the evening prior to the ex-dividend date is entitled to the dividend.
Between the closing of the market prior to an ex-dividend date and the opening on the
ex-date, a stock will lose a part of its value, namely the dividend amount. The previous
owner of the stock does not lose anything on the ex-dividend date, because although the
stock itself is lowered in value (now detached from its dividend), the owner still owns the
right to a divident payment.
Note that the drop in price of a stock on the ex-date is hard to detect since by normal daily
ﬂuctuations, a price can go up and down much larger amounts (i.e., 2–5%) than a typical
dividend (0.5%).
Still dividend payments add up, and must be taken into account when computing the long
term returns on dividend paying stocks (see Section 5.2.3).
Dividends are associated with rather complex tax issues. In most countries dividend
income is not taxed at the same rate as capital gains. Investors who are residents of the
same country as the dividend paying company often receive a tax credit along with the
dividend, so as to avoid the double taxation of proﬁts. Take the example of a French
corporation that has made a 1 EUR/share pre-tax proﬁt, it will pay about 0.34 EUR in
corporate tax and may then pay a 0.66 EUR dividend. A French investor would receive a

72
Financial products and ﬁnancial markets
50% tax credit along with the dividend (1.5 × 0.66 ≈1) and pay income tax on the whole
amount.
Other corporate events can change the price of a stock.† A stock split is when every
share of a company gets multiplied to become n shares (e.g. 1.5, 2, 3 or 10). Reverse-split
(rarer) is when the factor is smaller than one–the price then increases. Splits are used to
bring the price per share in an acceptable range. In the US, it is customary to have share price
between $10 and $100. Splits are less common in Europe, where prices can be as low as
0.40 EUR (Finmecanica Spa) or as high as 240 EUR (Electrabel). From the investors point
of view, the payment of dividends in shares (stock dividends) is very similar to splits with
a multiplier very close to 1, although at the ﬁrm’s accounting level the two operations are
quite different. A spin-off is when a company separates itself from one of its subsidiaries
by giving shares of the newly independent company to its shareholders. Finally, when a
company issues new shares, it often grants existing shareholders the right to buy new shares
at a discounted price in proportion to their current holdings. This right has a monetary value
and can often be bought and sold very much like a standard option (see below).
Just like dividends, splits, stock dividends, spin-offs and rights are valuable assets that
detach themselves from the stock ownership on a speciﬁc date (the ex-date).
On the ex-date, the price of the stock drops by an amount equal to the value of the
newly received asset.
In practice this relationship is never exact because of investors preferences, taxation
and, more importantly, the usual daily ﬂuctuations of prices. Most data providers multiply
historical prices by an adjustment factor so as to remove the price discontinuity due to these
corporate events.
A new public company can appear when a private company decides to make its share
available publicly through an initial public offering (IPO) or as the result of a spin-off (see
above). Stocks can sometime disappear from databases. A takeover or acquisition is when
a company is bought by another one (public or private), a merger is when the owners of two
company exchange shares as to all become the owners of a single company encompassing
the original two. Companies may also go bankrupt and be liquidated. Companies with
ﬁnancial difﬁculties might be suspended or even delisted from an exchange without being
bankrupt. Since a bankruptcy or a takeover is usually a violent event in the life of a stock, the
absence of data on stocks having undergone these events can lead to a risk underestimation.
This is an example of selection bias (see below).
5.2.3 Stock indices
Stock indices are indices that reﬂect the price movements of equity markets. They are
computed and published by stock exchanges (e.g. NYSE, Euronext), publishing companies
† In French, corporate events are called ‘op´erations sur titre’, or OST.

5.2 Financial products
73
(e.g. Dow Jones, McGraw Hill (S&P), Financial Times), or investment banks (e.g. Morgan
Stanley). They serve as benchmarks for portfolio managers. Equity derivatives such as
futures and options are linked to a given stock index, the most famous being the S&P 500
index futures. More complex derivatives, including those sold to the general public like
Guaranteed Capital funds, are also often linked to the performance of stock indices.
Each index is meant to reﬂect the performance of a given category of stocks. This category
is typically deﬁned in terms of geography (world, continent, country, speciﬁc exchange),
market capitalization (large cap, mid cap, small cap), economical sector (e.g. technology,
transportation, banking). The number of stocks represented in a given index varies from
a few tens (Bel-20, DJIA) to several thousands (MSCI World, NYSE Composite, Russell
3000).
Most stock indices are price averages weighted by market capitalization. The market
capitalization represents the total market value of a company; it is given by its current share
price multiplied by the number of outstanding shares (i.e. the number of shares required to
own 100% of the company). Therefore the value of such an index is given by:
I(t) = C
N

i=1
ni xi(t),
(5.1)
where ni and xi are the number of shares and current price of stock i. The constant C is
chosen such that the index equals a certain reference value (say 100) at a given date. When
stocks are added to or removed from the index, the constant C is modiﬁed so that the value
of the index computed with the new constituent list equals the old index value on the same
day. Note that a number of indices are now basing their computation on the ﬂoat market
capitalization: they are excluding from the number of outstanding shares, the shares that
cannot be bought in the open market, such as shares held by the state, by a parent company
or other core investors.
A notable exception to the market capitalization method is the Dow Jones Industrial
Average (DJIA). The DJIA is an index composed of 30 of the largest corporations in the
US. It is computed from the sum of the prices of its constituents (normalized by a single
constant). Table 5.2 shows the constituents of the DJIA on August 15, 2001. Note that
General Electric has a weight of about a third of 3M while its market capitalization is ten
times larger. This is due to the fact that the current price of 3M ($109.10) is about three
times larger than that of GE ($41.85). The reason why DJIA, the best known stock index,
is following such a strange methodology is purely historical. At the time of its creation, in
1896, all computations were done by hand, summing the prices of 30 stocks (actually 12
at the time) was deﬁnitely easier than anything else. The fact that this methodology is still
used today shows the extreme weight of history in ﬁnancial development.
Traditional stock indices are not good indicators of the total returns on a stock investment
for they do not include dividend payments made by stocks. In a standard price index,
historical prices are adjusted for splits, spin-offs and exceptional dividends but not for
regular dividends. Some more recent indices do include dividend payments, they are called
total return indices. For example, The Dow Jones Stoxx indices exist in both methodology,
their Europe Broad Index (total return) had an annualized return of 9.3% from January 1992

74
Financial products and ﬁnancial markets
Table 5.2. Weights of the constituents of the Dow Jones Industrial Average
Index on August 15, 2001.
Alcoa Inc
2.45
Intel Corp
2.02
American Express Company
2.62
International Paper Co
2.70
AT&T Corp
1.32
Intl Business Machines Corp
7.06
Boeing Co
3.71
Johnson & Johnson
3.79
Caterpillar Inc
3.58
JP Morgan Chase & Co
2.81
Citigroup Inc
3.24
Mcdonald’s Corporation
1.86
Coca–Cola Company
3.06
Merck & Co., Inc.
4.65
Du Pont De Nemours
2.78
Microsoft corp
4.30
Eastman Kodak Co
2.91
Minnesota Mining & Mfg Co
7.25
Exxon Mobil Corp
2.73
Philip Morris Companies Inc
2.95
General Electric Co.
2.78
Procter & Gamble Co
4.82
General Motors Corp
4.22
SBC Communications Inc
2.92
Hewlett-Packard Co.
1.65
United Technologies Corp
4.83
Home Depot Inc
3.28
Wal–Mart Stores Inc
3.48
Honeywell International Inc
2.44
The Walt Disney Co.
1.80
to September 2002, while its price counterpart only had a return of 6.4% over the same
period.
An issue related to the construction of stock indices is the problem of selection bias.
When doing historical analysis on a large pool of assets such as stocks, one analyzes data
that is available now. But the presence or absence of a stock’s history in a database is often
decided based on criteria that are applied now or in the near past. For instance it is very
difﬁcult to ﬁnd historical data on companies that no longer exist (bankruptcy, mergers).
The application of such ex-post criteria can change the statistical properties of the stud-
ied ensemble. As an illustration, we have computed the value of an index based on the
average returns of the current members of the Dow Jones Industrial Index (Fig. 5.1). The
average return of this index is about 50% higher than that of the historical Dow Jones.
The reason for the discrepancy is that the composition of the index has changed over time,
always including the largest industrial American companies of the time, while the syn-
thetic index includes in 1986 the companies that will be among the largest in 2002 even
though they were not necessarily the largest then. In other words, we have selected future
winners. Selection bias becomes very important when dealing with returns of funds. Not
only is the attrition rate high (especially for hedge funds,† where it is found to be 20%
per year – see e.g. Fung & Hsieh (1997)), there is also a reporting bias, funds typically
start reporting to databases after one year of good performance. A fund might also suspend
reporting when in difﬁculty to start again if the results are good, or disappear if difﬁculties
persist.
† Hedge funds are funds that use both long (buy) and short (sell) positions, derivative instruments and/or leverage.
These funds are typically very active in their trading. By opposition, traditional funds only buy and hold securities
(stocks and bonds).

5.2 Financial products
75
1988
1992
1996
2000
t
1000
10000
x(t)
Synthetic index
Dow Jones Industrial
Fig. 5.1. Example of selection bias. The full line shows the value over time of the Down Jones
Industrial Average (DJIA) index. The dotted line is an index obtained by averaging the historical
returns of the current 30 members of the DJIA.
5.2.4 Bonds
Bonds are a form of loans contracted by corporations and governments from ﬁnancial
markets. Unlike a bank loan which ties the bank to the corporation that contracted it, bonds
are securities – which means that they can be bought and sold freely in the ﬁnancial markets.
One distinguishes the primary market, where the issuers sells the bonds to investors,
usually through an investment bank, from the secondary market where investors buy and
sell existing bonds.
The simplest form of a bond is the zero-coupon (or pure discount) bond. It is a certiﬁcate
that entitles the bond owner (the bearer) to receive a nominal amount P from the issuer at
a ﬁxed date T in the future (the bond maturity). Since bonds can be bought and sold, the
bearer at maturity need not be the original purchaser of the bond. The price of bond depends
on the current level of interest rate, one deﬁnes the yield y of a zero-coupon bond via the
formula:
B(t) =
P
(1 + y(t))T −t ≈Pe−y(t)(T −t),
(5.2)
where B(t) is the current price of the bond. The yield is thus the compounded rate of interest
that one would effectively receive by buying the bond now and holding it to maturity. The
yield is not a fundamental quantity – it is inferred from the prices at which bonds trade –
but it follows very closely the level of interest rates. Obviously, B(t) < P, the ratio of the
two is called the discount factor d = (1 + y)−(T −t).

76
Financial products and ﬁnancial markets
One should remember that the discount factor, and hence the bond price goes down
when the yield goes up (and vice versa).
Most bonds also make regular payments (coupons) before the ﬁnal payment at maturity
(principal). For example, a ﬁve year 4% semi-annual coupon bond with a $1000 face value
would pay a total of ten $20 coupons every six months and a ﬁnal payment of $1000 along
with the last coupon. The (effective) yield y on a coupon bearing bond can be computed by
inverting a formula where the rate is assumed to be maturity independent:
B(t) =
N

i=1
Pi
(1 + y)Ti−t ≈
N

i=1
Pie−y(Ti−t),
(5.3)
where the set of {Pi} are the payments made by the bond at the times {Ti}. In the example
above Pi are all equal to $20 except the last one which is $1020. For a coupon bearing bond,
the price can be greater than the principal. This is the case when the coupon rate is higher
than the current level of interest rates. One then says the that bond is trading at a premium.
It is important to understand that the coupon rate of a bond stays ﬁxed in time, while its
yield ﬂuctuates with supply and demand.
An important quantity for risk management is the so-called duration of a bond, which
measures the sensitivity of the bond price to a change of the yield y: one therefore tries to
assess the change of the bond price if the interest rate curve was shifted parallel to itself by
an amount y. One would then have:
B
B
≈∂log B
∂y
y ≡−Dy,
(5.4)
where D is the duration of the bond, deﬁned as:
D = 1
B
N

i=1
Pi(Ti −t)e−y(Ti−t).
(5.5)
Note that the duration is an effective expiry time, i.e. the average time of the future cash-
ﬂows weighted by their contribution to the bond price. Note the minus sign in Eq. (5.4): as
noted above, bond prices go down when rates go up.
Bonds often have built-in options. In a callable bond, the issuers keeps the right to buy
back the bond (usually at parity) after a certain date (ﬁrst call date). In a convertible bond,
the owner can exchange the bond for company stock under certain condition. Owning a
callable bond can therefore be modelled as owing a bond and being short a bond-option,
whereas a convertible bond is like owing a bond plus a stock-option.

5.2 Financial products
77
Bonds come with credit risk. A company (or more rarely a government) might not be
able to make a coupon or principal payment to its bond holders. The market prices this risk
into the bond price. Bonds issued by companies that are more likely to default are cheaper
(higher yield) than those that are ﬁnancially trustworthy. Independant ﬁnancial companies,
called rating agency, give a grade to corporate and government bonds. Standard and Poor’s
and Moody’s are the better known ones. S&P’s rating systems goes from AAA for very
strong capacity to repay to C (highly vulnerable to non-payment) or D (in payment default);
Moody’s follows a similar system of letters from Aaa to C.
5.2.5 Commodities
Commodities are goods, usually raw materials, that are available in standard quality and
format from many different producers and needed by a large number of users. Like ﬁnancial
products, commodities are bought and sold in organized markets. In addition, the commodi-
ties market led to the development of derivatives (i.e., forwards and options), which were
later adopted by the ﬁnancial markets (see below). The most common types of commodities
are energy (crude oil, heating oil, gasoline, electricity, natural gas), precious and industrial
metals (gold, silver, platinum, copper, aluminum, lead, zinc), grains (soy, wheat, corn, oat,
rapeseed), livestock and meat (cattle, hogs, pork bellies), other foods (sugar, cocoa, coffee,
orange juice, milk) and various other raw materials (rubber, cotton, lumber, ammonia).
5.2.6 Derivatives
We give in this section a few deﬁnitions of some derivative contracts, also called contingent
claims because their value depend on the future dynamics of one or several underlying
assets. We will expand on the theory of these contracts in the second part of this book (see
Chapters 13 to 18).
A forward contract amounts to buying or selling today a particular asset (the underlying)
with a certain delivery date in the future. This enables the buyer (or seller) of the contract to
securetodaythepriceofagoodthathewillhavetobuy(orsell)inthefuture.Historically,for-
ward contracts were invented to hedge the risk of large price variations on agricultural prod-
ucts (e.g. wheat) and enable the producers to sell their crop at a ﬁxed price before harvesting.
In practice futures contracts are now much more common than forwards. The difference
is that forwards are over-the-counter contracts, whereas futures are traded on organized
markets. This means that one can pull out of a future contract at any time by selling
back the contract on the market, rather than having to negotiate with a single counterparty.
Also, forward contracts (like all over-the-counter contracts) carry a counterparty (or default)
risk, which is absent on futures markets. For forwards there are typically no payments from
either side before the expiry date whereas futures are marked-to-market and compensated
every day, meaning that payments are made daily by one side or the other to bring the value
of the contract back to zero: this is the margin call mechanism, see Table 5.3.
A swap contract is an agreement to exchange an uncertain stream of payments against
a predeﬁned stream of payments. One of the most common swap contracts is the interest

78
Financial products and ﬁnancial markets
Table 5.3. Example of how margin calls work for futures contract. The contract is
bought on Day 1 at $290. At the end of this day, the price is $300, and the $10
gain is transfered to the buyer. Similarly, the daily gain/loss of the subsequent
days are immediately materialized. On the last day, the buyer sells back his
contract at $300, while the contract ﬁnishes the day at $307. The total gain is
$300 −$290 = $10, which is also the sum of the margin calls
$(+10 + 10 −15 + 5).
Days
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Action
Buy 1 at $ 290
Sell 1 at $ 300
Close price
300
310
295
307
 margin
+10
+10
−15
+5
rate swap. For example, two parties A and B agree on the following: A will receive every
three months (90 days) during a certain time T an amount P × r90/360, where r is a ﬁxed
interest rate decided when the swap is contracted and P a certain nominal value. Party
B, on the other hand, will receive at the end of the ith three months interval an amount
P × ri90/360, where ri is the value of the three month rate at the beginning of the ith three
month interval. The swap in this case is an exchange between a non risky income and a
risky income. Of course, the value of the swap depends on the value of the ﬁxed interest
rate r that is being swapped. Usually, this ﬁxed interest rate (or the constant ‘leg’ of the
swap) is ﬁxed such that the initial value of the swap is nil.
A buy option (or call option) is the right, but not the obligation, to buy an asset (the
underlying) at a certain date in the future at a certain maximum price, called the strike
price, or exercize price. A call option is therefore a kind of insurance policy, protecting
the owner against the potential increase of the price of a given asset, which he will need to
buy in the future. The call option provides to its owner the certainty of not paying the asset
more than the strike price. Symmetrically, a put option protects against losses, by insuring
to the owner a minimum value for his asset.
Plain vanilla options (or European options) have a well deﬁned maturity or expiry date.
These options can only be exercized on a given date; for call options:
r either the price of the underlying on that date is above the strike and the option is exercized:
its owner receives the underlying asset that he has to pay the strike price. He can then
choose to sell back the asset immediately and pocket the difference;
r or the price is below the strike and the option is worthless.
There are many other types of options, the most common ones being American options
which can be exercized any time between now and their maturity. European and American
options are traded on organized markets and can be quite liquid, such as currency options
or index options. But some derivative contracts can have more complex, special purpose
clauses. These so-called ‘exotic’ derivatives are usually not traded on organized markets,

5.3 Financial markets
79
but over the counter (OTC). For example, barrier options that get inactivated whenever the
price exceeds some predeﬁned threshold (the ‘barrier’) are considered to be exotic options.
There is of course no end to complexity: one can trade an option on an interest swap
(called a swaption), which is characterized by the maturity of the option, the period and
the condition of the swap. One can even consider buying options on options!
5.3 Financial markets
5.3.1 Market participants
In principle, ﬁnancial markets allow two complementary populations to meet: entre-
preneurs that have some industrial projects but need funding, and therefore want some
investors that have money to invest and share, on the long run, both the future proﬁts and
the risk of these industrial projects. Note that ‘entrepreneurs’ can be private individuals,
companies or states. The investment instruments are usually stocks or bonds.
Financial markets can also play the role of insurance companies. As explained above, the
availability of forward (or futures) contracts, swaps and options offer the possibility of hedg-
ing, i.e. securing against losses. This is useful for many market participants, from farmers
to oil or metal producers, and to ﬁnancial institutions themselves that can use options, for
example, to protect themselves against market risks, or interest swaps to hedge against
interest rate variations. This population of market participants can be called hedgers. There
are two further broad categories of market participants. One is made of the broker-dealers,
or market makers that provide liquidity to the markets by offering to buy or to sell some
stocks, at any given instant of time. The dealers act as intermediaries between other market
participants, and compensate any momentary lack of counterparties that would make trading
less ﬂuid – and therefore more risky, since frequent trading ensures, to some extent, the
continuity (in time) of the price itself. The last category is that of speculators, that take
short to medium term positions on markets (at variance with investors that take longer term
positions). Speculators essentially make bets, that are based on extremely different types
of considerations. For example, speculators can consider that the recent price variations are
excessive and bet on a short term reversal: this is called a contrarian strategy. Conversely,
trend following strategies posit that recent trends will persist in the future. These decisions
can be based on intuition or on more or less sophisticated statistical approaches. Other
speculators make their mind based on the interpretation of economical or political news.
The role of speculators in the above ‘ecological’ system is both to provide liquidity and,
in principle, to enforce that assets are correctly priced, since large mispricing should give
rise to arbitrage opportunities (at least in a statistical sense). However, that speculators
indeed help the markets to set a fair price is far from obvious, since this population is most
sensitive to rumors, herding effects and panic. Arguably, bubbles and crashes are the result
of the inevitable presence of speculators in ﬁnancial markets. Finally, let us note that with
the appearance of fully electronic markets, the distinction between dealers and speculators
becomes more fuzzy. As will be discussed below, the possibility of placing limit orders
allow any market participant to effectively play the role of a market maker.

80
Financial products and ﬁnancial markets
5.3.2 Market mechanisms
As explained above, some contracts, such as forward contracts or exotic options, are sold
over-the-counter, that is between two well deﬁned parties, such as a private investor and a
ﬁnancial institution, or two ﬁnancial institutions. The transaction data (price, volume) is usu-
ally not made public. By deﬁnition, the corresponding contracts are not very liquid, but they
can be tailor made for the customer. On the other hand, organized markets provide liquidity
to the traded contracts, which nonetheless have to be standardized in terms of their strike,
maturity, etc. The way open markets ﬁx the price of any traded asset very much depends
on the market. The two main market mechanisms are continuous trading and auctions.
Auctions
Every market has its own set of rules for how auctions are conducted, but the general
principle is that during the auction, no trade takes place but buyers and sellers notify the
market of their intentions (price and volume of the trades). After a certain time, the auction
is closed and all the transactions are made at the auction price, determined such that the
number of transactions is maximized. Auctions are the norm in the primary markets, when
new bonds or stocks are issued. Auctions also take place in the secondary markets for some
less liquid securities or at special times (open, close) along with continuous trading. A
typical opening/closing auction procedure is that during the auctions, orders to buy or sell
can be entered or cancelled, and are recorded in an order book. The auction terminates at a
random time during a set interval (say 9:00 to 9:05) and a price is determined as to maximize
the number of trades. All buy orders above or equal to the auction price are executed against
all the sell order at or below it. During the auction the order book is usually kept hidden
with only an indicative price and volume being shown. The indicative price is the auction
price were it to close now.
Continuous trading
In continuous trading markets potential buyers notify the other participants of the maximum
price at which they are willing to buy (called the bid price), for sellers the minimum selling
price is called the offer, or ask price. The market keeps track of the highest bid (best bid, or
simply the bid) and lowest ask (best ask or the ask). At a given instant of time, two prices
are quoted: the bid price and the ask price, which are called the quotes. The collection of
all orders to buy and to sell is called the order book (see below), which is the list of the
total volume available for a trade at a given price. New buy orders below the bid price or
sell orders above the ask price add to the queue at the corresponding price.
If someone comes in with an unconditional order to buy (market order) or with a limit
price above the current ask price, he will then make a trade at the ask price with the person
with the lowest ask.† The corresponding price is printed as the transaction price. If the buy
† When there are multiple sell orders at the same price, priority is normally given to the oldest order, however
some markets such as the LIFFE ﬁll orders on a pro rata basis.

5.3 Financial markets
81
volume is larger than the volume at the ask, a succession of trades at increasingly higher
prices is triggered, until all the volume is executed. The activity of a market is therefore a
succession of quotes (quoted bid and ask) and trades (transaction prices). In most markets,
any participant can place either limit or market orders, but in quote driven markets, ﬁnal
clients can only place market orders, and thus must trade on the bids and asks of market
markers (see below). Continuous trading can be done by open outcry, where traders gather
together in the exchange or by an electronic trading system. In Europe and Japan, essentially
all trading is now done electronically while in the US, the transition to electronic markets
is slowly taking place.
5.3.3 Discreteness
The smallest interval between two prices is ﬁxed by the market, and is called the tick. For
example, on EuroNext (Stock exchange for France, Belgium and the Netherlands), the tick
size is 0.01 Euros for stocks worth less than 50 Euros, 0.05 Euros for stocks between 50 and
100 Euros, and 0.10 Euros for stocks beyond 100 Euros. For British stocks, the tick size is
typically 0.25 pence for stocks worth 300 pence. The order of magnitude of the tick size is
therefore 10−3 relative to the price of the stock, or 10 basis points. On OTC markets there
is no ﬁxed tick size, so that orders can be launched at a price with an arbitrary precision.
When analyzing prices on a tick-by-tick level, one ﬁnds distributions of returns which are
veryfarfromcontinuouswithmostreturnsbeingequaltozeroorplusorminusonetick.Even
on longer time scales: minutes, hours and even days, the discreteness of prices shows up in
empirical analysis of returns. For example, prior to decimalization, when US stocks were
still quoted in 1/8th or 1/16th of a dollar, the probability that the closing price be equal to
the opening price was 20% for a typical stock. In continuous price models, this probability
is zero.
5.3.4 The order book
Let us describe in more details the structure of the order book, and a few basic empirical
observations. As mentioned above, the order book is the list of all buy and sell ‘limit’ orders,
with their corresponding price and volume, at a given instant of time. A snapshot of an order
book (or in fact of the part of the order book close to the bid and ask prices) is given in
Figure 5.2.
When a new order appears (say a buy order), it either adds to the book if it is below the ask
price, or generates a trade at the ask if it is above (or equal to) the ask price. The dynamics of
the quotes and trades is therefore the result of the interplay between the ﬂow of limit orders
and market orders. An important quantity is the bid-ask spread: the difference between the
best sell price and the best offer price. This gives an order of magnitude of the transaction
costs, since the ‘fair’ price at a given instant of time is the midpoint between the bid and
the ask. Therefore, the cost of a market order is one half of the bid-ask spread. The bid-ask
spread is itself a dynamical quantity: market orders tend to deplete the order book and
increase the spread, whereas limit orders tend to ﬁll the gap and decrease the spread. The
role of market makers (or dealers) is to place buy and sell limit orders in order to provide

82
Financial products and ﬁnancial markets
refresh  |   island home  |   disclaimer  |   help
 QQQ
GET STOCK
  go
Symbol Search
LAST MATCH
Price
25.1290
Time
11:42:15.597
TODAY’S ACTIVITY
Orders
67,212
Volume
12,778,400
BUY ORDERS
SHARES
PRICE
600
25.1240
3,200
25.1230
3,200
25.1220
4,000
25.1220
100
25.1210
100
25.1200
3,200
25.1200
9,600
25.1130
4,000
25.1130
400
25.1130
4,000
25.1130
8,000
25.1120
5,000
25.1110
3,000
25.1100
1,000
25.1100
(237 more)
SELL ORDERS
SHARES
PRICE
500
25.1470
400
25.1470
600
25.1480
100
25.1500
3,200
25.1520
4,000
25.1520
4,000
25.1530
7,200
25.1530
3,200
25.1550
4,000
25.1570
4,000
25.1570
100
25.1590
800
25.1680
8,000
25.1680
5,000
25.1690
(119 more)
As of 11:42:15.769
QQQ
Fig. 5.2. Restricted part of the order book on ‘QQQ’, which is an exchange traded fund that tracks
the Nasdaq 100 index. Only the 15 best offers are shown. The ﬁrst column gives the number of
offered shares, the second column the corresponding price. Note that the tick size here is 0.001.
Source: www.island.com/bookviewer.

5.3 Financial markets
83
Table 5.4. Some data for the two liquid French stocks in
February 2001. The transaction volume is in number
of shares.
Quantity
France-Telecom
Total
Initial/ﬁnal price (Euros)
90-65
157-157
Tick size (Euros)
0.05
0.1
Total # orders
270,000
94,350
# trades
176,000
60,000
Transaction volume
75,6 ×106
23,4 ×106
Average bid-ask (ticks)
2.0
1.4
some liquidity and reduce the average spread, and therefore reduce the transaction costs.
Typically, the average spread on stocks ranges from one tick (for the most liquid stocks) to
ten ticks for less liquid stocks (see Table 5.4). We also show in Table 5.4 the total number
of orders (limit and market). In fact, although most of these orders are either market orders,
or placed in the immediate vicinity of the last trade, one can observe that some limit orders
are placed very far from the current price. The full distribution of the distance between the
current midpoint and the price of a limit order reveals an interesting slow power-law tail
for large distances, as if some some patient investors are willing to wait until the price goes
down quite signiﬁcantly before they buy. Note ﬁnally that limit orders can be cancelled at
any time if they have not been executed.
The way limit orders are placed, meet market orders, or are cancelled lead to very
interesting dynamics for the order book. One of the simplest question to ask is: what is
the (average) ‘shape’ of the order book, i.e., the average number of shares in the queue
at a certain distance from the best bid (or best ask). Perhaps surprisingly, this shape is
empirically found to be non trivial, see Fig. 5.3. The size of the queue reaches a maximum
away from the best offered price. This results from the competition between two effects:
(a) the order ﬂow is maximum around the current price, but (b) an order very near to the
current price has a larger probability to be executed and disappear from the book. Theoretical
models that explain this shape are currently being actively studied: see references below.
5.3.5 The bid-ask spread
As mentioned above, in order driven markets, the bid-ask spread appears as a consequence of
the way limit orders are stored and executed by market orders. In quote driven or specialists
markets, normal participants (clients) can only send market orders while the bid-ask spread
is ﬁxed by the ‘market makers’ (or ‘broker-dealers’) that offer simultaneously a buy price
and a sell price and make a proﬁt on the difference. Foreign exchange markets work this
way and so did the NASDAQ before the appearance of electronic trading platforms (ECNs).
In this case, the bid-ask spread is ﬁxed by the competition between different broker-dealers,

84
Financial products and ﬁnancial markets
1
10
100
1000
0
500
1000
Vivendi
Total
France Telecom
0
1
10
100
0
1
10
100
1000
10000
Fig. 5.3. Average size of the queue in the order book as a function of the distance from the best
price, in a log-linear plot for three liquid French stocks. The ‘buy’ and ‘sell’ sides of the distribution
are found to be identical (up to statistical ﬂuctuations). Both axis have been rescaled such as to
superimpose the data. Interestingly, the shape is found to be very similar for all three stocks studied.
Inset: same in log-log coordinates, showing a power-law behaviour.
and also by the market conditions: larger uncertainties lead to larger bid-ask spreads. Note
that market makers, because they have to quote prices ﬁrst, take the risk of being arbitraged
by market participants that have access to a piece of information not available to market
makers. This is a general phenomenon: liquidity providers (market makers or traders using
limit orders) try to earn the bid-ask spread but give away information, whereas liquidity
takers typically pay the spread but can take advantage of news and information.
5.3.6 Transaction costs
Trading costs money. When buying and selling securities and derivatives, one has to pay all
theagentsandintermediariesinvolvedinthetransaction(inﬁnance,nooneworksforfree...).
Commissions for buying and selling stocks can be as high as 1 or 2% for individuals buying
over the phone and as low as 1 or 2 basis points for institutions with very high turnover and
fully electronic processing. Commissions for futures contracts typically vary between $2
and $20 per contract. For index futures (∼$50 000) the lower ﬁgure corresponds to 0.4 bp,
and 0.2 bp for bond and currency futures (∼$100 000).
As we mentioned above, the bid-ask spread is a form of transaction cost. The half-spread
can be as low as 0.5–2 bp for liquid futures or 1–5 bp for liquid stocks, but it can reach
50 bp for less liquid stock or even 10 to 20% of the price for equity options. Finally, when

5.4 Summary
85
one buys (sells) very large quantities, the action of buying can increase the price leading to
a total cost per share higher than the current ask price, one then speaks of price impact.
As one buys, one trades ﬁrst with all the immediate sellers, the price has then to increase
to convince more people to sell. Another mechanism is that as participants see that there
is a large buyer in the market, they pull back their offers out of fear (that the buyer knows
something they don’t) or greed (trying to extract more money from the large buyer).
As a rule of thumb, commissions are the most important cost for individuals, bid-ask
spreads for moderate size traders and price impact dominates for very large funds.
5.3.7 Time zones, overnight, seasonalities
As compared to many simpliﬁed models of price changes, real markets display many id-
iosyncracies and ‘imperfections’. One is the fact that markets are not open all day long, but
only have a limited period of activity (market hours). Therefore, news that becomes known
when the market is closed cannot affect the price immediately, but rather accumulate until
the next morning and inﬂuence the ‘open’ price and lead to an overnight ‘gap’, i.e. a dif-
ference between the close of the previous day and the new open. This effect is signiﬁcant:
in terms of volatility, the overnight corresponds to roughly two hours of trading on stock
markets. Even during opening hours, the trading activity is not uniform: it peaks both at
the open and at the close, with a minimum around lunch time. Similarly, the activity is
not uniform across days of the week, or months of the year. Finally, not all markets are
simultaneously open, and different time zones behave differently. A well-known effect is
for example an increased activity at 2:30 p.m. European time, due to the fact that major
U.S. economic ﬁgures are announced at 8:30 a.m. east-coast time.
5.4 Summary
r Among the large variety of ﬁnancial products and ﬁnancial markets, some are quite
simple (like stocks), whereas others, like options on swaps, can be exceedingly
complex. Both ﬁnancial markets and ﬁnancial products display many idiosyncra-
cies. These details may be unimportant for a rough understanding, but are often
crucial when it comes to the ﬁnal implementation of any quantitative theory or
model.
r Further reading
J. C. Hull, Futures, Options and Other Derivatives, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1997.
W. F. Sharpe, G. J. Alexander, J. V. Bailey, Investments (6th Edition), Prentice Hall, 1998.

86
Financial products and ﬁnancial markets
r Specialized papers: survival bias
S. J. Brown, W. N. Goetzmann, J. Park, Conditions for survival: Changing risk and the performance
of Hedge fund managers and CTAs, Review of Financial Studies, 5, 553 (1997).
W. Fung, D. A. Hsieh, The information content of performance track records, Journal of Portfolio
Management, 24, 30 (1997).
r Specialized papers: statistical analysis of order books
B. Biais, P. Hilton, C. Spatt, An empirical analysis of the limit order book and the order ﬂow in the
Paris Bourse, Journal of Finance, 50, 1655 (1995).
J.-P. Bouchaud, M. M´ezard, M. Potters, Statistical properties of stock order books: empirical results
and models, Quantitative Finance, 2, 251 (2002).
D. Challet, R. Stinchcombe, Analyzing and modelling 1+1d markets, Physica A, 300, 285 (2001).
D. Challet, R. Stinchcomb, Exclusion particle models of limit order ﬁnancial markets, e-print cond-
mat/0208025.
M. G. Daniels, J. D. Farmer, G. Iori, E. Smith, How storing supply and demand affects price diffusion,
e-print cond-mat/0112422.
H. Luckock, A statistical model of a limit order market, Sidney University preprint (September 2001).
S. Maslov, Simple model of a limit order-driven market, Physica A, 278, 571 (2000).
S. Maslov, M. Millis, Price ﬂuctuations from the order book perspective – empirical facts and a simple
model, Physica A, 299, 234 (2001).
M. Potters, J.-P. Bouchaud, More statistical properties of order books and price impact, e-print cond-
mat/0210710.
F. Slanina, Mean-ﬁeld approximation for a limit order driven market model, Phys. Rev., E 64, 056136
(2001).
E. Smith, J. D. Farmer, L. Gillemot, S. Krishnamurthy, Statistical theory of the continuous double
auction, e-print cond-mat/0210475.
R. D. Willmann, G. M. Schuetz, D. Challet, Exact Hurst exponent and crossover behavior in a limit
order market model, e-print cond-mat/0208025, to appear in Physica A.
I. Zovko, J. D. Farmer, The power of patience: A behavioral regularity in limit order placement,
Quantitative Finance, 2, 387 (2002).
