8
Skewness and price-volatility correlations
It seemed to me that calculation was superﬂuous, and by no means possessed of the
importance which certain other players attached to it, even though they sat with ruled
papers in their hands, whereon they set down the coups, calculated the chances, reck-
oned, staked, and–lost exactly as we more simple mortals did who played without any
reckoning at all.
(Fyodor Dostoevsky, The Gambler.)
8.1 Theoretical considerations
8.1.1 Anomalous skewness of sums of random variables
In the previous chapter, we have assumed that the ‘sign’ part of the ﬂuctuations ϵi and the
‘amplitude’ part σi were independent. For ﬁnancial applications, this might be somewhat
restrictive. We will indeed discuss below that there are in ﬁnancial time series interesting
correlations between past price changes and future volatilities. These appear when one
considers the following correlation function:†
L(i, j) =

ηiη2
j

−⟨ηi⟩

η2
j

≡σ 23/2gL(|i −j|).
(8.1)
This correlation function is essentially zero when i > j, but signiﬁcantly negative for i < j,
indicating that price drops tend to be followed by higher volatilities (and vice versa).
Much as volatility correlations induce anomalous kurtosis, these price-volatility
correlations induce some anomalous skewness.
Taking into account the fact that in the stochastic volatility model deﬁned by Eq. (7.4)
the ϵi are iid, the third moment of the sum log(xN/x0) = N
i=1 ηi reads:

N

i, j,k=1
ηiη jηk

=
N

i=1

η3
i

+ 3
N

i=1
N

j>i

ηiη2
j

.
(8.2)
† The choice of the letter L to denote this correlation refers to the ‘leverage effect’ to which it is usually, but
somewhat incorrectly, associated – see the discussion below, Section 8.3.1.

8.1 Theoretical considerations
131
0
200
400
600
800
1000
 N
-1.5
-1.0
- 0.5
0.0
 Skewness N
Fig. 8.1. Unconditional skewness ςN at scale N as a function of N, when the rescaled
price-volatility correlation function gL(ℓ) is equal to −exp(−αℓ), with α = 1/100. Note that the
skewness is non monotonous, and decays for N ≫α−1 as N −1/2.
The unconditional skewness ςN is then found to be:
ςN = ς0gL(0)
√
N
+
3
√
N
N

ℓ=1
	
1 −ℓ
N

gL(ℓ),
(8.3)
where ς0 is the skewness of ϵ.
The above formula is quite interesting, since it shows that even for an unskewed distri-
bution of increments (i.e. for ς0 = 0), some skewness can appear on longer time scales. In
this case, the skewness can actually be non monotonous if gL(ℓ) decreases fast enough. We
show this in Figure 8.1 for gL(ℓ) = −exp(−αℓ) with α = 1/100.
In the above calculation, we have assumed the price process to be multiplicative, and
considered the skewness of the log-price distribution. Empirically, as discussed below,
skewness effects are actually quite small, much smaller than the volatility ﬂuctuation effects
discussed in the previous chapter, that lead to a large kurtosis. This large kurtosis is seen
both on price increments and on log-price increments: considering one or the other does
not change the results much (if the time lag N is not too large). The skewness, on the other
hand, is small and is therefore very sensitive to the quantity that one studies, absolute price
increments δx or relative price increments η. Take for example η to be Gaussian with a
volatility σ ≪1. By deﬁnition, the skewness of η is zero, but the random variable exp η has
a positive skewness equal to 3σ. We thus need at this stage to discuss in greater detail if one
should choose absolute price changes, or relative price changes, or yet another quantity, as
the ‘fundamental’ random variable.

132
Skewness and price-volatility correlations
8.1.2 Absolute vs. relative price changes
A standard hypothesis in theoretical ﬁnance is to assume that price changes are proportional
to prices themselves, therefore leading to a multiplicative model xk+1 = xk(1 + ηk), where
the random returns ηk are the fundamental objects. The logarithm of the price is thus a sum
of random variables. Some justiﬁcations of this assumption have been given in Chapter 6;
it is clear that the order of magnitude of relative ﬂuctuations (a few percent per day for
stocks) is much more stable in time and across stocks than absolute price changes. This
fact is also, to some extent, related to important approximate symmetries in ﬁnance. For
example, the price of stocks is somewhat arbitrary, and is controlled by the total number
of stocks in circulation. One can for example split each share into ten, thereby dividing
the price of each stock by ten. This split is often done to keep the share prices around
$100. It is clear that the day just after the split, the typical absolute price variations will
also be divided by a factor ten (dilation symmetry). Another symmetry exists in foreign
exchange markets, between two similar currencies. In this case, there cannot be any distinc-
tion between expressing currency A in units of B and get a price X, or vice-versa, giving a
price 1/X. Relative returns, deﬁned such that δx/x = −δ(1/x)/(1/x), indeed respect this
symmetry.
However, these symmetries are not exactly enforced in ﬁnancial markets. There are
several effects that explicitly break the dilation symmetry. One is the fact that prices are
discrete: price changes are quoted in ticks, which are ﬁxed fraction of dollars (i.e. not in
percent), which introduce a well deﬁned scale for price changes. Another effect is round
numbers:sharesareusuallyboughtandsoldbylotsofmultiplesoftens.Theverymechanism
leading to price changes is therefore not expected to vary continuously as prices evolve,
but rather to adapt only progressively if prices are seen to rise (or decrease) signiﬁcantly
over a certain time window. This will be the motivation of the ‘retarded’ model developed
below.
In foreign exchange markets, the symmetry between X and 1/X is obviously vi-
olated when the two currencies are very dissimilar. For example, the Mexican peso
vs. U.S. dollar shows very sudden downward moves, not reﬂected on the other side of the
distribution.
Finally, there are various ﬁnancial instruments for which the dilation argument does not
work. For example, the BUND contract is computed as the value of a ten year bond paying
a ﬁxed rate (currently 6% per annum) every three months on a nominal value of 100 000
Euros. The short term interest rates are modiﬁed by central banks, in general in steps of
0.25% or 0.50%, independently of the value of the rate itself. Another interesting example
is the volatility itself, which is traded on option markets; there is not clear reason why
volatility changes should be proportional to the volatility itself.
It is therefore interesting to study this issue empirically, by looking at the mean absolute
deviation of δx, conditioned to a certain value of the price x itself, which we shall denote
⟨|δx|⟩|x. If the return η were the natural random variable, one should observe that ⟨|δx|⟩|x =
σ1x, where σ1 is constant (and equal to the MAD of η). Of course, since the volatility is

8.1 Theoretical considerations
133
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
0
5
10
15
20
<|dx|>
S&P 500
140
150
160
170
180
190
0.5
1.0
<|dx|>
GBP/USD
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
x
0
0.2
0.4
<|dx|>
Bund
Fig. 8.2. MAD of the increments δx, conditioned to a certain value of the price x, as a function of x,
for the three chosen assets. Although this quantity, overall, grows with the price x for the S&P 500
or the GBP/USD, there are plateau-like regions where the absolute price change is nearly
independent of the price: see for example when the S&P 500 was around 400. In the case of the
Bund, the absolute volatility is nearly ﬂat.
itself random, there will be ﬂuctuations; however, ⟨|δx|⟩|x and

⟨δx2⟩|x should on average
increase linearly with x.
Now, in many instances (Figs. 8.2 and 8.3), one rather ﬁnds that ⟨|δx|⟩|x is roughly
independent of x for long periods of time. The case of the CAC 40 is particularly interesting,
since during the period 1991–95, the index went from 1400 to 2100, leaving the absolute
volatility nearly constant (if anything, it is seen to decrease with x).
On longer time scales, however, or when the price x rises substantially, the MAD of
δx increases signiﬁcantly, as to become indeed proportional to x (see Fig. 8.2 (a)). A way
to model this crossover from an additive to a multiplicative behaviour is to postulate that
the RMS of the increments progressively (over a time scale T×) adapt to the changes of
price. A precise implementation of this idea is given in the next section. Schematically,
for T < T×, the prices behave additively, whereas for T > T×, multiplicative effects start

134
Skewness and price-volatility correlations
1400
1600
1800
2000
x
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
σ
Fig. 8.3. RMS of the increments δx, conditioned to a certain value of the price x, as a function of x,
for the CAC 40 index for the 1991–95 period; it is quite clear that during that time period ⟨δx2⟩|x
was almost independent of x.
playing a signiﬁcant role.† Mathematically, this reads:
⟨(x(T ) −x0)2⟩= DT
(T ≪T×);

log2
	x(T )
x0


= σ 2T
(T ≫T×).
(8.4)
On liquid stock markets, this time scale is on the order of months (see below).
8.1.3 The additive-multiplicative crossover and the q-transformation
A convenient way to parametrize the crossover between the two regimes is to introduce an
additive random variable ξ(T ), and to represent the price x(T ) as:
x(T ) = x0 (1 + q(T )ξ(T ))1/q(T )
q(T ) ∈[0, 1].
(8.5)
For T ≪T×,q →1, the price process is additive, with x = x0(1 + ξ), whereas for T ≫T×,
q →0, (1 + qξ)1/q →exp ξ, which corresponds to the multiplicative limit. The index q
can be taken as a quantitative measure of the ‘additivity’ of the process. This representation
† In the additive regime, where the variance of the increments can be taken as a constant, we shall write ⟨δx2⟩=
σ 2
1 x2
0 = Dτ.

8.2 A retarded model
135
can be inverted to deﬁne a ‘fundamental’ additive variable as:
ξ(T ) =
1
q(T )

exp
	
q(T ) log
x(T )
x0

−1

,
(8.6)
which we will refer to as the ‘q-transformation’. It is interesting to compute the skewness
ς(T ) of the return log(x(T )/x0) as a function of q(T ), assuming that ξ(T ) has zero skewness,
and a volatility σ(T ) ≪1. One ﬁnds, to lowest order in σ:
ς(T ) = −3 q(T ) σ(T ).
(8.7)
If q(T ) = 0, the skewness is zero as it should, since in this case log(x(T )/x0) ≡ξ(T ).
However, if q(T ) = 1, the skewness of log(x(T )/x0) is negative. Therefore, a negative
skewness in the log-price can arise simply because as a consequence of taking the logarithm
of an unskewed variable.
8.2 A retarded model
8.2.1 Deﬁnition and basic properties
Let us give some more quantitative ﬂesh to the idea that price changes only progressively
adapt if prices are seen to rise (or decrease) signiﬁcantly over a certain time window. A way
to describe this lagged response to price changes is generalize Eq. (7.4) and to postulate
that price changes are proportional not to instantaneous prices but to a moving average x R
i
of past prices over a certain time window:
δxi = x R
i σiϵi,
x R
i =
∞

ℓ=0
K(ℓ)xi−ℓ,
(8.8)
where K(ℓ) is a certain averaging kernel, normalized to one, ∞
ℓ=0 K(τ) ≡1, and decaying
over a typical time T×. It will be more convenient to rewrite x R
i as:
x R
i =
∞

ℓ=0
K(ℓ)

xi −
ℓ

ℓ′=1
δxi−ℓ′

(8.9)
≡xi −
∞

ℓ′=1

K(ℓ′)δxi−ℓ′,
(8.10)
where 
K(ℓ) = ∞
ℓ′=ℓK(ℓ′). Note that from the normalization of K(ℓ), one has 
K(0) = 1,
independently of the speciﬁc shape of K. (This will turn out to be important in the following.)
For the sake of simplicity, one can take for K(ℓ) a simple exponential with a certain
decay rate α, such that T× = 1/ log α. In this case, 
K(ℓ) = αℓ. From Eq. (8.10), one sees
that the limit α →1 (T× →∞) corresponds to the case where x R is a constant, equal to the
initial price x0. Therefore, in this limit, the retarded model corresponds to a purely additive
model. The other limit α →0 (inﬁnitely small T×) leads to x R ≡x and corresponds to a

136
Skewness and price-volatility correlations
purely multiplicative model. More generally, for time lags much smaller than T×, x R does
not vary much, and the model is additive, whereas for time lags much larger than T×, x R
roughly follows (in a retarded way) the value of x and the process is multiplicative.
The retarded model with an exponential kernel K(ℓ) can indeed be reformulated in terms
of a product of random 2 × 2 matrices. Deﬁne the vector ⃗Vk as the set x R
k , xk. One then
has:
⃗Vk+1 = Mk ⃗Vk,
(8.11)
where Mk is a random matrix whose elements are M11,k = α, M12,k = 1 −α, M21,k =
σkϵk and M22,k = 0. Using standard theorems on products of random matrices that
generalize the classic results on products of random scalars, one directly ﬁnds that the
large time statistics of both components of ⃗V is log-normal.†
In the following, we will assume that the relative difference between x and x R is small.
This is the case when σ√T× ≪1, which means that the averaging takes place on a time
scale such that the relative changes of price are not too large. Typically, for stocks one ﬁnds
T× = 50 days, σ = 2% per square-root day, so that σ√T× ∼0.15.
Let us calculate the ‘leverage’ correlation function deﬁned by Eq. (8.1) above, to ﬁrst
order in σ√T×. One ﬁnds, using ηi ≡δxi/xi and Eq. (8.8), and assuming for a while that
σ is constant:

η2
i+ℓηi

= σ 2 
ϵ2
i+ℓ


1 −2
∞

ℓ′=1

K(ℓ′)δxi+ℓ−ℓ′
xi+ℓ

δxi
xi

.
(8.12)
To lowest order in the retardation effects, one can replace in the above expression
δxi+ℓ−ℓ′/xi+ℓby σϵi+ℓ−ℓ′ and δxi/xi by σϵi, because xR/x = 1 + O(σ√T×). Since the
ϵ are assumed to be independent of zero mean and of unit variance, one has:
⟨ϵi+ℓ−ℓ′ϵi⟩= δℓ,ℓ′.
(8.13)
Therefore, using the deﬁnition of gL given in Eq. (8.1):
gL(ℓ) ≈−2σ 
K(ℓ).
(8.14)
Taking into account the volatility ﬂuctuations would amount to replacing in the above result
σ by σ 2
i σ 2
i+ℓ/σ 2
i
3/2.
8.2.2 Skewness in the retarded model
Using Eq. (8.14) in Eq. (8.3), we ﬁnd for the skewness of the log-price distribution (assuming
that ϵ has zero skewness):
ςN = −6σ
√
N
N

ℓ=1
	
1 −ℓ
N


K(ℓ).
(8.15)
† See, e.g., Crisanti et al. (1993).

8.3 Price-volatility correlations: empirical evidence
137
It is interesting to compute the q-transform ξN (see Eq. (8.5)) of log xN/x0, where xN is
obtained using the retarded model with a constant volatility and a Gaussian ϵ. In order to ﬁnd
an unskewed ξN, a natural choice for q, if σ is small, is given by Eq. (8.7). Using Eq. (8.15),
one ﬁnds that q varies from 1 for small N to 0 at large N. Interestingly, the statistics of
the resulting ‘fundamental’ variable ξN has a distribution which is found numerically to be
very close to a Gaussian when the kernel is a pure exponential .
Therefore, for the Gaussian retarded model, the q-transformation with an appropriate
value of q allows one to approximately account for the non Gaussian distribution of
log(xN/x0).
8.3 Price-volatility correlations: empirical evidence
We now report some empirical study of this volatility-return correlation both for individual
stocks and for stock indices. One indeed ﬁnds that correlations are between future volatilities
and past price changes. For both stocks and stock indices, the volatility-return correlation
is short ranged, with however a different decay time for stock indices (around 10 days) than
for individual stocks (around 50 days). The amplitude of the correlation is also different,
and is much stronger for indices than for individual stocks. We then argue that this effect for
stocks can be interpreted within the retarded model deﬁned above. This model does however
not account properly for the data on stock indices, which seems to reﬂect a ‘panic’-like
effect, whereby large price drops of the market as a whole triggers a signiﬁcant increase of
activity.
Eq. (8.14) suggests a normalization for the ‘leverage’ correlation function different from
the ‘natural’ one, as:
L(ℓ) = ⟨[ηi+ℓ]2ηi⟩e

η2
i
2
e
,
(8.16)
where ⟨. . .⟩e refers to the empirical average. Within the retarded model with a constant
volatility, one ﬁnds: L ≡−2
K.
The analyzed set of data consists in 437 U.S. stocks, constituent of the S&P 500 index and
7 major international stock indices (S&P 500, NASDAQ, CAC 40, FTSE, DAX, Nikkei,
Hang Seng). The data is daily price changes ranging from January 1990 to May 2000 for
stocks and from January 1990 to October 2000 for indices. One can compute L both for
individual stocks and stock indices. The raw results were rather noisy. If one assumes that
all individual stocks behave similarly and average L over the 437 different stocks, one
obtains a somewhat cleaner quantity noted L S. Similarly, averaging over the 7 different
indices, gives L I. The results are given in Figure 8.4 and Figure 8.5 respectively. The
insets of these ﬁgures show L S(ℓ) and L I(ℓ) for negative values of ℓ. For stocks the results
are not signiﬁcantly different from zero for ℓ< 0. For indices, one ﬁnds some signiﬁcant
positive correlations for ℓ< 0 up to |ℓ| = 4 days, which might reﬂect the fact that large
daily drops (that contribute signiﬁcantly to ⟨η2
i+ℓ⟩e) are often followed by positive ‘rebound’
days.

138
Skewness and price-volatility correlations
0
50
100
150
200
τ
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
LS(τ)
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Fig. 8.4. Return-volatility correlation for individual stocks. Data points are the empirical correlation
averaged over 437 U.S. stocks, the error bars are two sigma errors bars estimated from the
inter-stock variability. The full line shows an exponential ﬁt (Eq. (8.17)) with AS = 1.9 and
T×S = 69 days. Note that L S(0) is not far from the retarded model value −2. The inset shows the
same function for negative times. τ is in days.
We now focus on positive values of ℓ. The correlation functions can rather well be ﬁtted
by single exponentials:
L(ℓ) = −A exp
	
−ℓ
T×

.
(8.17)
For U.S. stocks, one ﬁnds AS = 1.9 and T×S ≈69 days, whereas for indices the amplitude
AI is signiﬁcantly larger, AI = 18 and the decay time shorter: T×I ≈9 days.
As can be seen from the ﬁgures, both L S and L I are signiﬁcant and negative: price drops
increase the subsequent volatility – this is the so-called “leverage” effect. The economic
interpretation of this effect is still very much controversial.† Even the causality of the effect
is sometimes debated: is the volatility increase induced by the price drop or conversely do
prices tend to drop after a volatility increase? An early interpretation, due to Black, argues
that a price drop increases the risk of a company to go bankrupt, and its stock therefore
becomes more volatile. On the contrary, one can argue that an increase of volatility makes
the stock less attractive, and therefore pushes its price down.
A more subtle interpretation still is the so-called ‘volatility feedback’ effect, where an
anticipatedincreaseoffuturevolatilitybymarketoperatorstriggerssellorders,andtherefore
decreases the price. If the volatility indeed increases, this generates a correlation between
price drop and volatility increase. This of course assumes that the market anticipation of
the future volatility is correct, which is dubious in general.
† A recent survey of the different models can be found in Bekaert & Wu (2000).

8.3 Price-volatility correlations: empirical evidence
139
0
50
100
150
200
τ
-30
-20
-10
0
10
LI(τ)
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
-20
-10
0
10
20
Fig. 8.5. Return-volatility correlation for stock indices. Data points are the empirical correlation
averaged over 7 major stock indices, the error bars are two sigma errors bars estimated from the
inter-index variability. The full line shows an exponential ﬁt (Eq. (8.17)) with AI = 18 and
T×I = 9.3 days. The inset shows the same function for negative times. τ is in days.
8.3.1 Leverage effect for stocks and the retarded model
A simpler interpretation, which accounts rather well for the data on individual stocks, is
that the observed ‘leverage’ correlation is induced by the retardation mechanism discussed
above. Because the amplitude of absolute price changes remains constant for a while, the
relative volatility increases when the price goes down and vice versa. From Eq. (8.14), one
expects L(ℓ→0) to be equal to −2, independently of the detailed shape of K. This property
entirely relies on the normalization of K. Taking into account the volatility ﬂuctuations
would multiply the above result by a factor ⟨σ 2(t)σ 2(t + τ)⟩/⟨σ 2(t)⟩2 ≥1.
As shown in Figure 8.4, L S(ℓ→0) is close to (although indeed slightly below) the
value −2 for individual stocks. One can give weight to this ﬁnding by analyzing a set of
500 European stocks and 300 Japanese stocks, again in the period 1990–2000. One again
ﬁnds an exponential behaviour for L S with a time scale on the order of 40 days and, more
importantly, and initial values of L S close to the retarded model value −2: AS = 1.96 and
T×S = 38 days for European stocks and AS = 1.5 and T×S = 47 days for Japanese stocks.
One should emphasize that these numbers (including the previously quoted U.S. results)
carry large uncertainties as they vary signiﬁcantly with the time period and averaging
procedure.
As a more direct test of the retarded model, one can study the correlation between δxi/xi
and (δxi+ℓ/x R
i+ℓ)2. This correlation is found to be zero within error bars, which should be
expected if most of the leverage correlations indeed come from a simple retardation effect.

140
Skewness and price-volatility correlations
Another test of the retarded model when the volatility is ﬂuctuating is to study the residual
variance of the local squared volatility (δx/xR)2 as a function of the horizon T of the aver-
aging kernel. The above value of T×S is found to correspond to a minimum of this quantity.
In the retarded model, the leverage effect has a simple interpretation: in a ﬁrst
approximation, price changes are independent of the price. But since the volatility is
deﬁned as a relative quantity, it of course increases when the price decreases, simply
because the price appears in the denominator.
We therefore conclude that the leverage effect for stocks might not have a very deep
economical signiﬁcance, but can be assigned to a simple ‘retarded’ effect, where the change
of prices are calibrated not on the instantaneous value of the price but rather on a moving
average of the price. This means that on short times scales (< T×S), the relevant model for
stock price variations is additive rather than multiplicative. The observed skewness of the
log-price is therefore induced by the ‘wrong’ choice of the relevant variable in this case –
see the discussion of Eq. (8.7).
8.3.2 Leverage effect for indices
Figure 8.5 shows that the ‘leverage effect’ for indices has a much larger amplitude and
tends to decay to zero much faster with the lag ℓ. This is at ﬁrst sight puzzling, since the
stock index is, by deﬁnition, an average over stocks. So one can wonder why the strong
leverage effect for the index does not show up in stocks and conversely why the long time
scale seen in stocks disappears in the index.† These seemingly paradoxical features can be
rationalized within the framework a simple one factor model (see Chapter 11), where the
‘market factor’ is responsible for the strong leverage effect.
The empirical leverage effect on indices shown in Figure 8.5 suggests that there exists
an index speciﬁc ‘panic-like’ effect, resulting from an increase of activity when the market
goes down as a whole. A natural question is why this panic effect does not show up also
in the statistics of individual stocks. A detailed analysis of the one factor model actually
indicates that, to a good approximation, the index speciﬁc leverage effect and the stock
leverage effect do not mix in the limit where the volatility of individual stocks is much
larger than the index volatility. Since the stock volatility is indeed found to be somewhat
larger than the index volatility, one expects the mixing to be small and difﬁcult to detect.
From a practical point of view, the fact that the leverage correlation for indices cannot
be explained solely in terms of a retarded effect means that the skewness of the log-price
is a real effect rather than an artifact based on a bad choice of the fundamental variable.
The strong, genuine negative skewness observed for indices has important consequences
for option pricing that will be expanded upon in Chapter 13.
† A close look at Fig. 8.4 actually suggests that there is indeed a stronger, short time effect for stocks as well.

8.4 The Heston model: a model with volatility ﬂuctuations and skew
141
0
2
4
6
8
1(hour)
-0.008
-0.006
-0.004
-0.002
0.000
0.002
Return-volume correlation
Fig. 8.6. Intraday return-volume correlation for the S&P 500 futures. The plain line corresponds
to a ﬁt with the sum of two exponentials, one with a rather short time scale (a few hours), and a
second with a correlation time of 9 days, as extracted from the leverage correlation function.
8.3.3 Return-volume correlations
As explained in Section 7.3.2, the sources of volatility are twofold: trading volume on the
one hand, amplitude of individual price jumps in the other. In the above ‘panic’ interpretation
of the strong leverage effect for stocks, we have implied that a price drop triggers an increase
of activity. It is interesting to check this directly by studying the return-volume correlation
function, deﬁned as:
Crv(ℓ) = ⟨ηk · δNk+ℓ⟩

⟨η2⟩⟨δN 2⟩
,
(8.18)
where δNk is the deviation from the average number of trades in a small time interval
centered around time t = kτ. Figure 8.6 shows this correlation function for the S&P 500
futures, with τ = 5 minutes. As expected, this correlation shows the same features as the
leverage correlation: it is negative, implying that the trading activity indeed increases after a
price drop. This correlation function decays on two time scales: one rather short (one hour)
corresponding to intraday reactions, and a longer one (several days) similar to the leverage
correlation time reported above.
8.4 The Heston model: a model with volatility ﬂuctuations and skew
It is interesting at this stage to discuss a continuous time model for price ﬂuctuations,
introduced by Heston (1993), that contains both volatility correlations and the ‘leverage’
effect, and that is exactly solvable, in the sense that the distribution of price changes for

142
Skewness and price-volatility correlations
different time intervals can be explicitly computed. We ﬁrst give the equations deﬁning the
model, then give without proof some exact results, and ﬁnally discuss the limitations of this
model as compared with empirical data.
The starting point is to write Eq. (7.4) in continuous time:
dxt = xt (mdt + σtdW) ,
(8.19)
where σt is the volatility at time t and dW is a Brownian noise with unit volatility. Now, let
us assume that the volatility itself has random, mean reverting ﬂuctuations such that:
d

σ 2
t

= −

σ 2
t −σ 2
0

dt + ϒσtdW ′,
(8.20)
where 
 is the inverse mean reversion time towards the average volatility level σ0, and dW ′ is
another Brownian white noise of unit variance, possibly correlated with dW. The correlation
coefﬁcient between these two noises will be called ρ. When ρ < 0, this model describes
the leverage effect, since a decrease of price (i.e. dW < 0) is typically accompanied by
an increase of volatility (i.e. dW ′ > 0). The coefﬁcient ϒ measures the ‘volatility of the
volatility’.
Remarkably, many exact results can be obtained within this framework, due to the partic-
ular form of the noise term in the second equation, proportional to σt itself.† First, one can
compute the stationary distribution P(v) of the squared volatility v = σ 2, which is found
to be a gamma distribution (not an inverse gamma distribution):
P(v) =
vβ−1
(β)vβ
0
e−v/v0,
(8.21)
with:
v0 = ϒ2
2
,
β = 2
σ 2
0
ϒ2 .
(8.22)
The unconditional distribution of price returns (averaged over the volatility process) can
also be exactly computed, in terms of its characteristic function. The expression is too
complicated to be given here; let us only mention three important features of the explicit
solution:
r It is strongly non Gaussian for short time scales, and becomes progressively more and
more Gaussian for longer time scales. Its skewness and kurtosis can be exactly computed
for all time lags τ. For ρ = 0, the kurtosis to lowest order in ϒ, reads:
κ(τ) =
ϒ2
2σ 2
0 
e−
τ + 
τ −1
(
τ)2
,
(8.23)
which is plotted in Fig. 8.7. As expected, the kurtosis in this model is induced by the
volatility of the volatility ϒ. For 
τ →0, the kurtosis tends to a constant, whereas for

τ →∞, the kurtosis has the expected τ −1 behaviour.
† The results given here are discussed in details in Dragulescu & Yakovlenko (2002).

8.4 The Heston model: a model with volatility ﬂuctuations and skew
143
0
20
40
60
80
100
Wτ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
s(τ), κ(τ)
Kurtosis
Skewness
Fig. 8.7. Time structure of the skewness and kurtosis in the Heston model, as given by the non
dimensional part of the expressions of ς(τ) and κ(τ).
r The skewness of the distribution can be tuned by choosing the correlation coefﬁcient ρ.
To lowest order in ϒ and ρ, the skewness reads:
ς(τ) =
√
2ϒρ
√

σ0
e−
τ −1 + 
τ
(
τ)3/2
,
(8.24)
which is again plotted in Fig. 8.7. Note that the skewness is negative when ρ < 0, and
has a non monotonous time structure. When 
τ →∞, the skewness decays like τ −1/2,
as for independent increments.
r The asymptotic tails of the distribution are exponential for all times. The parameter of
this exponential fall off becomes time independent in the limit 
τ ≫1.
This model has however three important limitations:
r First, as shown in Section 7.2.2, the empirical distribution of the volatility is closer to
an inverse gamma distribution than to a gamma distribution. Note that Eq. (8.21) above
predicts a Gaussian like decay of the distribution of the volatility for large arguments, at
variance with the observed, much slower, power-law.
r Second, the asymptotic decay of the kurtosis is as τ −1 for 
τ ≫1, i.e. much faster than
the power-law decay mentioned in Section 7.2.1. This is related to the fact that there is
a well deﬁned correlation time in the Heston model, given by 1/
, beyond which the
volatility correlation function decays exponentially. Therefore, the multiscale nature of
the volatility correlations is missed in the Heston model.

144
Skewness and price-volatility correlations
r Finally, the correlation time for the skewness is, in the Heston model, also equal to 1/
. In
other words, the temporal structure of the leverage effect and of the volatility ﬂuctuations
are, in this model, strongly interconnected.
8.5 Summary
r Price returns and volatility are negatively correlated. This effect induces a negative
skew in the distribution of returns.
r In an additive model for price changes, returns and volatility (deﬁned using relative
price changes) are negatively correlated for a trivial reason. This simple mechanism,
embedded in the retarded volatility model where price increments progressively
(rather than instantaneously) adapt to the price level, accounts well for the empirical
data on individual stocks. The retarded model interpolates smoothly between an
additive and a multiplicative random process.
r For stock indices, the negative correlation is much stronger and cannot be accounted
for by the retarded model. A similar negative correlation exists between price changes
and volume of activity.
r The Heston model is a continuous time stochastic volatility model that captures
both the volatility ﬂuctuations and the skewness effect. However, this model fails to
describe the detailed shape of the empirical volatility distribution, and the multi-time
scale nature of the volatility correlations.
r Further reading
J. Y. Campbell, A. W. Lo, A. C. McKinley, The Econometrics of Financial Markets, Princeton
University Press, Priceton, 1997.
A. Crisanti, G. Paladin and A. Vulpiani, Products of Random Matrices in Statistical Physics, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1993.
r Specialized papers
G. Bekaert, G. Wu, Asymmetric volatility and risk in equity markets, The Review of Financial Studies,
13, 1 (2000).
J.-P. Bouchaud, M. Potters, A. Matacz, The leverage effect in ﬁnancial markets: retarded volatility
and market panic, Phys. Rev. Lett., 87, 228701 (2001).
A. Dragulescu and V. Yakovlenko, Probability distribution of returns for a model with stochastic
volatility, Quantitative Finance, 2, 443 (2002).
C. Harvey, A. Siddique, Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests, Journal of Finance, LV, 1263
(2000).
S. L. Heston, A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility with applications to bond
and currency options, Review of Financial Studies, 6, 327 (1993).
J. Perello, J. Masoliver, Stochastic volatility and leverage effect, e-print cond-mat/0202203.
J. Perello, J. Masoliver, J. P. Bouchaud, Multiple time scales in volatility and leverage correlations:
a stochastic volatility model, e-print cond-mat/0302095.
B. Pochart, J.-P. Bouchaud, The skewed multifractal random walk with applications to option smiles,
Quantitative Finance, 2, 303 (2002).
