10
Risk measures
Il faut entrer dans le discours du patient et non tenter de lui imposer le nˆotre.†
(G´erard Haddad, Le jour o`u Lacan m’a adopt´e.)
10.1 Risk measurement and diversiﬁcation
Measuring and controlling risks is now a major concern in many modern human activities.
The ﬁnancial markets, which act as highly sensitive (probably over sensitive) economical
and political thermometers, are no exception. One of their rˆoles is actually to allow the
different actors in the economic world to trade their risks, to which a price must therefore
be given.
The very essence of the ﬁnancial markets is to ﬁx thousands of prices all day long, thereby
generating enormous quantities of data that can be analysed statistically. An objective
measure of risk therefore appears to be easier to achieve in ﬁnance than in most other
human activities, where the deﬁnition of risk is vaguer, and the available data often very
poor. Even if a purely statistical approach to ﬁnancial risks is itself a dangerous scientists’
dream (see e.g. Fig. 1.1), it is fair to say that this approach has not been fully exploited until
the very recent years, and that many improvements can be still expected in the future, in
particular concerning the control of extreme risks. The aim of this chapter is to introduce
some classical ideas on ﬁnancial risks, to illustrate their weaknesses, and to propose several
theoretical ideas devised to handle more adequately the ‘rare events’ where the true ﬁnancial
risk resides.
10.2 Risk and volatility
Financial risk has been traditionally associated with the statistical uncertainty on the ﬁnal
outcome. Its traditional measure is the RMS, or, in ﬁnancial terms, the volatility. We will
note by R(T ) the logarithmic return on the time interval T , deﬁned by:
R(T ) = log
x(T )
x0

,
(10.1)
† One should accept the patient’s language, and not try to impose our own.

10.2 Risk and volatility
169
where x(T ) is the price of the asset X at time T , knowing that it is equal to x0 today (t = 0).
When |x(T ) −x0| ≪x0, this deﬁnition is equivalent to R(T ) = x(T )/x0 −1.
If P(x, T |x0, 0) dx is the conditional probability of ﬁnding x(T ) = x within dx, the
volatility σ of the investment is the standard deviation of R(T ), deﬁned by:
σ 2 = 1
T

P(x, T |x0, 0)R2(T ) dx −

P(x, T |x0, 0)R(T ) dx
2
.
(10.2)
The volatility is still now often chosen as the adequate measure of risk associated to a
given investment. We notice however that this deﬁnition includes in a symmetrical way
both abnormal gains and abnormal losses. This fact is a priori curious. The theoretical
foundations behind this particular deﬁnition of risk are numerous:
r First, operational; the computations involving the variance (volatility squared) are rela-
tively simple and can be generalized easily to multi-asset portfolios.
r Second, the central limit theorem (CLT) presented in Chapter 2 seems to provide a gen-
eral and solid justiﬁcation: by decomposing the motion from x0 to x(T ) in N = T/τ
increments, one can write:
x(T ) = x0
N−1

k=0
(1 + ηk),
(10.3)
where ηk is by deﬁnition the instantaneous return. Therefore, we have:
R(T ) = log
x(T )
x0

=
N−1
	
k=0
log(1 + ηk).
(10.4)
In the classical approach one assumes that the returns ηk are independent variables. From
the CLT we learn that in the limit where N →∞, R(T ) becomes a Gaussian random vari-
able centred on a given average return ˜mT , with ˜m = ⟨log(1 + η)⟩/τ, and whose standard
deviation is given by σ
√
T .† Therefore, in this limit, the entire probability distribution of
R(T ) is parameterized by two quantities only, ˜m and σ: any reasonable measure of risk
must therefore be based on σ.
However, as we have discussed at length in Chapter 2, this is not true for ﬁnite N (which
corresponds to the ﬁnancial reality: for example, there are only roughly N ≈320 half-hour
intervals in a working month), especially in the ‘tails’ of the distribution, that correspond
precisely to the extreme risks. We will discuss this point in detail below. Furthermore, as
explained in Chapter 7, the presence of long-ranged correlations in the way the volatility
itself ﬂuctuates can slow down dramatically the asymptotic convergence towards the Gaus-
sian limit: non Gaussian effects are in fact important after several weeks, sometimes even
after several months.
One can give to σ the following intuitive meaning: after a long enough time T , the price
of asset X is given by:
x(T ) = x0 exp[ ˜mT + σ
√
T ξ],
(10.5)
† To second order in ηk ≪1, we ﬁnd: σ 2 = 1
τ ⟨η2⟩and ˜m = 1
τ ⟨η⟩−1
2σ 2.

170
Risk measures
where ξ is a Gaussian random variable with zero mean and unit variance. The quantity σ
√
T
gives us the order of magnitude of the deviation from the expected return. By comparing
the two terms in the exponential, one ﬁnds that when T ≫ˆT ≡σ 2/ ˜m2, the expected return
becomes more important than the ﬂuctuations. This means that the probability that x(T )
turns out to be less than x0 (and that the investment leads to losses) becomes small. The
security horizon ˆT increases with σ. For a rather good individual stock, one has – say –
˜m = 10% per year and σ = 20% per year, which gives a ˆT as long as 4 years!
In fact, one should not compare x(T ) to x0, because a risk free investment would have pro-
duced x0erT . The investor should therefore only be concerned with the excess return over the
risk free rate, m∗= ˜m −r. (Note however that the existence of guaranteed capital products
shows that many people think in terms of raw returns and not in terms of excess returns!)
The quality of an investment is often measured by its Sharpe ratio S, that is, the ‘signal-
to-noise’ ratio of the excess return m∗T to the ﬂuctuations σ
√
T . The Sharpe ratio is in fact
directly related to the ‘security horizon’ ˆT :
S = m∗√
T
σ
≡

T
ˆT
.
(10.6)
The Sharpe ratio increases with the investment horizon and is equal to 1 precisely when
T = ˆT . Practitioners usually deﬁne the Sharpe ratio for a 1-year horizon. In the case of
stocks mentioned above, the Sharpe ratio is equal to 0.25 if one subtracts a risk-free rate
of 5% annual. An investment with a Sharpe ratio equal to one is considered as extremely
good. Note however that the Sharpe ratio itself is only known approximately. Suppose that
one has ten years of daily returns, corresponding to N = 2500 observations. We neglect
volatility correlations, which leads to a substantial underestimation of the error. The error
on ˜m is σ/
√
N, whereas the relative error on σ is √(2 + κ)/N, where κ is the daily kurtosis.
The error on the Sharpe ratio therefore reads:
S =
1
√
N
[
√
T + S

(2 + κ)],
(10.7)
where T is expressed in days. For the one year Sharpe ratio, T = 250, one ﬁnds S ≈
0.31 + 0.045S with κ = 3. Take the case of stocks, for which S ≈0.25: the error on the
Sharpe is of the same order as the Sharpe itself! This illustrates the difﬁculty of establishing
the quality of a given investment, especially based on a few months of performance.
As a rule of thumb, for the one-year Sharpe ratio, the error is:
S ≈
1
√n ,
(10.8)
where n is the number of available years of data.

10.3 Risk of loss, ‘value-at-risk’ (VaR) and expected shortfall
171
Note that the most probable value of x(T ), as given by Eq. (10.5), is equal to x0 exp( ˜mT ),
whereas the mean value of x(T ) is higher: assuming that ξ is Gaussian, one ﬁnds:
x0 exp[( ˜mT + σ 2T /2)]. This difference is due to the fact that the returns ηk, rather than
the absolute increments δxk, are taken to be iid random variables. However, if T is short
(say up to a few months), the difference between the two descriptions is hard to detect. As
explained in details in Chapter 8, a purely additive description is actually more adequate at
short times. We shall therefore often write in the following x(T ) as:
x(T ) = x0 exp[ ˜mT + σ
√
T ξ] ≃x0 + mT +
√
DT ξ,
(10.9)
where we have introduced the following notations, which we shall use throughout the
following: m ≡˜mx0 for the absolute return per unit time, and D ≡σ 2x2
0 for the absolute
variance per unit time (usually called the diffusion constant of the stochastic process). As
we now discuss, the non-Gaussian nature of the random variable ξ is the most important
factor determining the probability for extreme risks.
10.3 Risk of loss, ‘value-at-risk’ (VaR) and expected shortfall
10.3.1 Introduction
The fact that ﬁnancial risks are often described using the volatility is actually intimately
related to the idea that the distribution of price changes is Gaussian. In the extreme case of
‘L´evy ﬂuctuations’, for which the variance is inﬁnite, this deﬁnition of risk would obviously
be meaningless. Even in a less risky world where the variance is well deﬁned, this measure
of risk has three major drawbacks:
r The ﬁnancial risk is obviously associated to losses and not to proﬁts. A deﬁnition of risk
where both events play symmetrical roles is thus not in conformity with the intuitive
notion of risk, as perceived by professionals.
r As discussed at length in Chapter 2, a Gaussian model for the price ﬂuctuations is never
justiﬁed fortheextremeevents,sincetheCLTonlyappliesinthecentreofthedistributions.
Now, it is precisely these extreme risks that are of most concern for all ﬁnancial houses, and
thus those which need to be controlled in priority. In recent years, international regulators
have tried to impose some rules to limit the exposure of banks to these extreme risks.
r The presence of extreme events in the ﬁnancial time series can actually lead to a very bad
empirical determination of the variance: its value can be substantially changed by a few
‘big days’. A bold solution to this problem is simply to remove the contribution of these
so-called aberrant events! This rather absurd solution was actually quite commonly used
in the past.
Both from a fundamental point of view, and for a better control of ﬁnancial risks, another
deﬁnition of risk is thus needed. An interesting notion that we shall present now is the
probability of extreme losses, or, equivalently, the value-at-risk (VaR).

172
Risk measures
10.3.2 Value-at-risk
The probability of losing an amount −δx larger than a certain threshold  on a given time
interval τ is deﬁned as:
P[δx < −] = P<[−] =
 −
−∞
Pτ(δx) dδx,
(10.10)
where Pτ(δx) is the probability density for a price change on the time interval τ. One can
alternatively deﬁne the risk as a level of loss (the ‘VaR’) ∗corresponding to a certain
probability of loss P∗over the time interval τ (for example, P∗= 1%):
 −∗
−∞
Pτ(δx) dδx = P∗.
(10.11)
This deﬁnition means that a loss greater than ∗over a time interval of τ = 1 day (for
example) happens only every 100 days on average (for P∗= 1%). Let us note that:
r This deﬁnition does not take into account the fact that losses can accumulate on con-
secutive time intervals τ, leading to an overall cumulated loss which might substantially
exceed ∗.
r Similarly, this deﬁnition does not take into account the value of the maximal loss ‘inside’
the period τ. In other words, only the closing price over the period [kτ, (k + 1)τ] is
considered, and not the lowest point reached during this time interval: we shall come
back on these temporal aspects of risk in Section 10.4.
More precisely, one can discuss the probability distribution P(, N) for the worst daily
loss  (we choose τ = 1 day to be speciﬁc) on a temporal horizon T = Nτ. Using the
results of Section 2.1, one has:
P(, N) = N[P>(−)]N−1Pτ(−).
(10.12)
For N large, this distribution takes a universal shape that only depends on the asymptotic
behaviour of Pτ(δx) for δx →−∞. In the important case where Pτ(δx) decays faster
than any power-law, one ﬁnds that P(, N) is given by Eq. (2.7), which is represented in
Figure 10.1.
Choosing the temporal horizon to be T ∗= τ/P∗such that on average one event beyond
∗takes place, we ﬁnd that the distribution of the worst daily loss has a maximum precisely
for  = ∗. The intuitive meaning of ∗is thus the value of the most probable worst day
over a time interval T ∗.†
Note that the probability for  to be even worse ( > ∗) is equal to 63% (Fig. 10.1).
One could deﬁne ∗in such a way that this exceedance probability is smaller, by requiring
a higher conﬁdence level, for example 95%. This would mean that on a given horizon (for
example 100 days), the probability that the worst day is found to be beyond ∗is equal to
† If the distribution Pτ (δx) is a power-law with an index µ = 3, one ﬁnds that the most probable worst day over
a time interval T ∗is (3/4)1/3∗≈0.91∗.

10.3 Risk of loss, ‘value-at-risk’ (VaR) and expected shortfall
173
Λ
P(Λ, N)
Λmax
37%
63%
Fig. 10.1. Extreme value distribution (the so-called Gumbel distribution) P(, N) when Pτ(δx)
decreases faster than any power-law. The most probable value, max, has a probability equal to 0.63
to be exceeded.
5%, instead of 63%. This new ∗then corresponds to the most probable worst day on a
time period equal to 100/0.05 = 2000 days.
The standard in the ﬁnancial industry is to choose τ = 10 trading days (two weeks) and
P∗= 0.05, corresponding to the 95% VaR over two weeks. In this case, the time interval
and the time horizon are identical.
In the Gaussian case, the VaR is directly related to the volatility σ. Indeed, for a Gaussian
distribution of RMS equal to σ1x0 = σ x0
√τ, and of mean m1, one ﬁnds that ∗is given
by:
PG<

−∗+ m1
σ1x0

= P∗−→∗=
√
2σ1x0erfc−1[2P∗] −m1
(10.13)
(cf. Eq. (2.36)). When m1 is small, minimizing ∗is thus equivalent to minimizing σ. It is
furthermore important to note the very slow growth of ∗as a function of the time horizon
in a Gaussian framework. For example, for TVaR = 250τ (1 market year), corresponding
to P∗= 0.004, one ﬁnds that ∗≈2.65σ1x0. Typically, for τ = 1 day, σ1 = 1%, and
therefore, the most probable worst day on a market year is equal to −2.65%, and grows
only to −3.35% over a 10-year horizon!
In the general case, however, there is no useful link between σ and ∗. In some cases,
decreasing one actually increases the other (see below, Sections 12.1.3 and 12.3). Let us
nevertheless mention the Chebyshev inequality, often invoked by the volatility fans, which
states that if σ exists,
∗2 ≤σ 2
1 x2
0
2P∗.
(10.14)
This inequality suggests that in general, the knowledge of σ is tantamount to that of ∗.
This is however completely wrong, as illustrated in Figure 10.2. We have represented ∗
as a function of the time horizon T ∗= Nτ for three distributions Pτ(δx) which all have
exactly the same variance, but decay as a Gaussian, as an exponential, or as a power-law

174
Risk measures
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Number of days
0
2
4
6
8
Most probable worst loss (%)
µ=3
Exponential
Gaussian
Fig. 10.2. Growth of ∗as a function of the number of days N, for an asset of daily volatility equal
to 1%, with different distribution of price increments: Gaussian, (symmetric) exponential, or
power-law with µ = 3 (cf. Eq. (2.55)). Note that for intermediate N, the exponential distribution
leads to a larger VaR than the power-law; this relation is however inverted for N →∞.
with an exponent µ = 3 (cf. Eq. (2.55)). Of course, the slower the decay of the distribution,
the faster the growth of ∗with time.
Table 10.1 shows, in the case of international bond indices, a comparison between the
prediction of the most probable worst day using a Gaussian model, or using the observed
quasi-exponential character of the tail of the distribution (TLD), and the actual worst day
observed the following year. It is clear that the Gaussian prediction is systematically over-
optimistic. The exponential model leads to a number which is seven times out of 11 below
the observed result, which is indeed the expected result (Fig. 10.1).
Note ﬁnally that the measure of risk as a loss probability keeps its meaning even if the
variance is inﬁnite, as for a L´evy process. Suppose indeed that Pτ(δx) decays very slowly
when δx is very large, as:
Pτ(δx)
≃
δx→−∞
µAµ
|δx|1+µ ,
(10.15)
with µ < 2, such that ⟨δx2⟩= ∞. Aµ is the ‘tail amplitude’ of the distribution Pτ; A gives
the order of magnitude of the probable values of δx. The calculation of ∗is immediate
and leads to:
∗= AP∗−1/µ,
(10.16)
which shows that in order to minimize the VaR one should minimize Aµ, independently of
the probability level P∗.

10.3 Risk of loss, ‘value-at-risk’ (VaR) and expected shortfall
175
Table 10.1. J. P. Morgan international bond indices (expressed
in French francs), analysed over the period 1989–93, and worst
day observed day in 1994. The predicted numbers correspond
to the most probable worst day max. The amplitude of the
worst day with 95% conﬁdence level is easily obtained, in the
case of exponential tails, by multiplying max by a factor 1.53.
The last line corresponds to a portfolio made of the 11 bonds
with equal weight. All numbers are in per cent.
Worst day
Worst day
Worst day
Country
Log-normal
TLD
Observed
Belgium
0.92
1.14
1.11
Canada
2.07
2.78
2.76
Denmark
0.92
1.08
1.64
France
0.59
0.74
1.24
Germany
0.60
0.79
1.44
Great Britain
1.59
2.08
2.08
Italy
1.31
2.60
4.18
Japan
0.65
0.82
1.08
Netherlands
0.57
0.70
1.10
Spain
1.22
1.72
1.98
United States
1.85
2.31
2.26
Portfolio
0.61
0.80
1.23
10.3.3 Expected shortfall
Although more directly related to large risks than the variance, the concept of Value-at-Risk
still suffers from some inconsistencies. For example, ∗is the amount (in dollar) that has
a certain probability P∗to be exceeded, but if exceeded, what is the typical loss incurred?
The second problem is that value-at-risk is not subadditive in general, which means that if
one mixes two assets X1 and X2 with weights p1 and p2, one does not necessarily have
that:
∗(p1X1 + p2X2) ≤p1∗(X1) + p2∗(X2).
(10.17)
This inequality means that diversiﬁcation should never increase the total risk, which is
indeed a required property of any consistent measure of risk. Note that the volatility is
indeed subadditive, since:
p2
1σ 2
1 + p2
2σ 2
2 + 2ρ12 p1 p2σ1σ2 ≤(p1σ1 + p2σ2)2,
(10.18)
which follows because the correlation coefﬁcient ρ12 ≤1.
A quantity which is subadditive, and gives a more faithful estimate of the amplitude
of large losses, is the average loss conditioned to the fact that ∗is exceeded, called the

176
Risk measures
expected shortfall (or conditional value-at-risk) E∗:
E∗=
 −∗
−∞(−δx)Pτ(δx) dδx
P∗
.
(10.19)
Note that in this deﬁnition, P∗is ﬁxed, and ∗deduced from Eq. (10.11).
We should nevertheless mention that for typical (well behaved) distributions Pτ(δx), E∗
and ∗are, in the small P∗limit, proportional to each other. For example, if Pτ(δx) is a
power-law as in Eq. (10.15), one ﬁnds (see Eq. (2.16)):
E∗=
µ
µ −1∗
(µ > 1).
(10.20)
Typically, for stocks µ is in the range 3 to 5, and thus E∗∼1.25 −1.5∗.
In some special cases, however, the distribution of proﬁt and losses contains discrete
components, or has a non monotone behaviour, that make E∗very different from ∗.
10.4 Temporal aspects: drawdown and cumulated loss
Worst low
A ﬁrst problem which arises is the following: we have deﬁned P as the probability for the
loss observed at the end of the period [kτ, (k + 1)τ] to be at least equal to . However,
in general, a worse loss still has been reached within this time interval. What is then the
probability that the worst point reached within the interval (the ‘low’) is a least equal to ?
The answer is easy for symmetrically distributed increments (we thus neglect the average
return mτ ≪, which is justiﬁed for small enough time intervals): this probability is simply
equal to 2P,
P[Xlo −Xop < −] = 2P[Xcl −Xop < −],
(10.21)
where Xop is the value at the beginning of the interval (open), Xcl at the end (close) and
Xlo, the lowest value in the interval (low). The reason for this is that for each trajectory just
reaching − between kτ and (k + 1)τ, followed by a path which ends up above − at
the end of the period, there is a mirror path with precisely the same weight which reaches
a ‘close’ value lower than −.† This factor of 2 in cumulative probability is illustrated
in Figure 10.3. Therefore, if one wants to take into account the possibility of further loss
within the time interval of interest in the computation of the VaR, one should simply divide
by a factor 2 the probability level P∗appearing in Eq. (10.11).
A simple consequence of this ‘factor 2’ rule is the following: the average value of the
maximal excursion of the price during time τ, given by the high minus the low over that
period, is equal to twice the average of the absolute value of the variation from the beginning
† In fact, this argument – which dates back to Bachelier himself (1900)! – assumes that the moment where the
trajectory reaches the point − can be precisely identiﬁed. This is not the case for a discontinuous process, for
which the doubling of P is only an approximate result.

10.4 Temporal aspects: drawdown and cumulated loss
177
Table 10.2. Average value of the absolute value of the open/close daily
returns and maximum daily range (high-low) over open for S&P 500,
DEM/$ and Bund. Note that the ratio of these two quantities is indeed
close to 2. Data from 1989 to 1998.
A =
 |Xcl−Xop|
Xop

B =
 Xhi−Xlo
Xop

B/A
S&P 500
0.472%
0.924%
1.96
DEM/$
0.392%
0.804%
2.05
Bund
0.250%
0.496%
1.98
0
2
4
6
8
loss level (%)
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
P>(dx)
losses (close-open) [left axis]
0
2
4
6
8
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
intraday losses (low-open) [right axis]
Fig. 10.3. Cumulative probability distribution of losses (Rank histogram) for the S&P 500 for the
period 1989–98. Shown is the daily loss (Xcl −Xop)/Xop (thin line, left axis) and the intraday loss
(Xlo −Xop)/Xop (thick line, right axis). Note that the right axis is shifted downwards by a factor of
two with respect to the left one, so that in theory the two lines should fall on top of one another.
to the end of the period (⟨|open-close|⟩). This relation can be tested on real data; the
corresponding empirical factor is reported in Table 10.2.
Cumulated losses
Another very important aspect of the problem is to understand how losses can accumulate
over successive time periods. For example, a bad day can be followed by several other bad
days, leading to a large overall loss. One would thus like to estimate the most probable
value of the worst week, month, etc. In other words, one would like to construct the graph
of ∗(M), where M is the number of successive days over which the risk must be estimated,
given a ﬁxed overall investment horizon T = Nτ.

178
Risk measures
The answer is straightforward in the case where the price increments are independent
random variables. When the elementary distribution Pτ is Gaussian, PMτ is also Gaussian,
with a variance multiplied by M. One must also take into account the fact that the number of
different intervals of size Mτ for a ﬁxed investment horizon T decreases by a factor M. For
large enough N/M, one then ﬁnds, using the asymptotic behaviour of the error function:
∗(M)

T ≃σ1x0

2M log

N
√
2π M

,
(10.22)
where the notation |T means that the investment period is ﬁxed.† The main effect is then
the
√
M increase of the volatility, up to a small logarithmic correction.
The case where Pτ(δx) decreases as a power-law has been discussed in Chapter 2: for
any M, the far tail remains a power-law (that is progressively ‘eaten up’ by the Gaussian
central part of the distribution if the exponent µ of the power-law is greater than 2, but keeps
its integrity whenever µ < 2). For ﬁnite M, the largest moves will always be described by
the power-law tail. Its amplitude Aµ is simply multiplied by a factor M (cf. Section 2.2.2).
Since the number of independent intervals is divided by the same factor M, one ﬁnds:‡
∗(M)

T = AM1/µ
 N
Mτ
 1
µ
= AN 1/µ,
(10.23)
independently of M. Note however that for µ > 2, the above result is only valid if ∗(M) is
located outside of the Gaussian central part, the size of which growing as σ
√
M (Fig. 10.4).
In the opposite case, the Gaussian formula (10.22) should be used.
One can ask a slightly different question, by ﬁxing not the investment horizon T but
rather the total probability of occurrence P∗. This amounts to multiplying simultaneously
the period over which the loss is measured and the investment horizon by the same factor
M. In this case, one ﬁnds that:
∗(M) = M
1
µ ∗(1).
(10.24)
The growth of the value-at-risk with M is thus faster for small µ, as expected. The case of
Gaussian ﬂuctuations corresponds to µ = 2.
Drawdowns
One can ﬁnally analyze the amplitude of a cumulated loss over a period that is not a priori
limited. More precisely, the question is the following: knowing that the price of the asset
today is equal to x0, what is the probability that the lowest price ever reached in the future will
be xmin; and how long such a drawdown will last? This is a classical problem in probability
theory (see Feller (1971)). We shall assume a multiplicative model of independent returns,
and denote as  = log(x0/xmin) > 0 the maximum amplitude of the loss. If the Pτ(η) decays
† One can also take into account the average return, m1 = ⟨δx⟩. In this case, one must subtract to ∗(M)|T the
quantity −m1N (the potential losses are indeed smaller if the average return is positive).
‡ cf. previous footnote.

10.4 Temporal aspects: drawdown and cumulated loss
179
-10
-5
0
5
10
dx
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
P(dx)
Gaussian region
`Tail’
−Λ
Fig. 10.4. Distribution of cumulated losses for ﬁnite M: the central region, of width ∼σ M1/2, is
Gaussian. The tails, however, remember the speciﬁc nature of the elementary distribution Pτ(δx),
and are in general fatter than Gaussian. The point is then to determine whether the conﬁdence level
P∗puts ∗(M) within the Gaussian part or far in the tails.
sufﬁciently fast for large negative η, the result is that the tail of the distribution of  behaves
as an exponential:
P()
∝
→∞exp

−
0

,
(10.25)
where 0 > 0 is the ﬁnite solution of the following equation:

exp

−ln(1 + η)
0

Pτ(η) dη = 1.
(10.26)
If this equation only has 0 = ∞as a solution, the decay of the distribution of drawdowns
is slower than exponential.
It is interesting to show how the above result can be obtained. Let us introduce the
cumulative distribution P>() =
 ∞
 P(′) d′. The ﬁrst step of the ‘walk’ of the log-
arithm of the price, of size log(1 + η), can either exceed −, or stay above it. In the
ﬁrst case, the level  is immediately exceeded, and the event contributes to P>(). In
the second case, one recovers the very same problem as initially, but with  shifted to
 + log(1 + η). Therefore, P>() obeys the following equation:
P>() =
 η∗
−1
Pτ(η) dη +
 +∞
η∗
Pτ(η)P>( + log(1 + η)) dη,
(10.27)
where log(1 + η∗) = −. If one can neglect the ﬁrst term in the right-hand side for large

180
Risk measures
 (which should be self-consistently checked), then, asymptotically, P>() should obey
the following equation:
P>() ≈

Pτ(η)P>( + log(1 + η)) dη.
(10.28)
Inserting an exponential ansatz for P>() then leads to Eq. (10.26) for 0, in the limit
 →∞.
Let us study the simple case of Gaussian ﬂuctuations, for which:
Pτ(η) =
1
√
2πσ 2τ
exp −(η −m∗τ)2
2σ 2τ
.
(10.29)
where m∗is the excess return, which means that we are deﬁning drawdowns with respect
to a risk free investment. For m∗τ, σ 2τ ≪1, equation (10.26) becomes:
−m∗
0
+ σ 2
22
0
= 0 →0 = σ 2
2m∗.
(10.30)
The quantity 0 gives the order of magnitude of the worst drawdown. One can under-
stand the above result as follows: 0 is the amplitude of the probable ﬂuctuation over the
characteristic time scale ˆT = σ 2/m∗2 introduced above. By deﬁnition, for times shorter
than ˆT , the average return m∗is negligible. Therefore, the order of typical drawdowns is:
∝
√
σ 2 ˆT = σ 2/m∗.
If m∗= 0, the very idea of worst drawdown loses its meaning: if one waits a time
long enough, the price can reach arbitrarily low values (again, compared to the risk free
investment). It is natural to introduce a quality factor that compares the average excess return
m∗T on a time T to the amplitude of the worst drawdown 0. One thus has m∗T /0 =
2m∗2T /σ 2 ≡2T / ˆT . This quality factor is therefore twice the square of the Sharpe ratio.
The larger the Sharpe ratio, the smaller the time needed to end a drawdown period.
More generally, if the width of Pτ(η) is much smaller than 0, one can expand the
exponential and ﬁnd that the above equation, −(m∗/0) + (σ 2/22
0) = 0 is still valid,
independently of the detailed shape of the distribition of returns.
How long will these drawdowns last? The answer can only be statistical. The probability
for the time of ﬁrst return T to the initial investment level x0, which one can take as the
deﬁnition of a drawdown (although it could of course be immediately followed by a second
drawdown), has, for large T , the following form:
P(T ) ≃τ 1/2
T 3/2 exp

−T
ˆT

.
(10.31)
The probability for a drawdown to last much longer than ˆT is thus very small. In this sense,
ˆT appears as the characteristic drawdown time. However, ˆT is not equal to the average
drawdown time, which is on the order of

τ ˆT , and thus much smaller than ˆT . This is

10.5 Diversiﬁcation and utility – satisfaction thresholds
181
related to the fact that short drawdowns have a large probability: as τ decreases, a large
number of drawdowns of order τ appear, thereby reducing their average size.
10.5 Diversiﬁcation and utility – satisfaction thresholds
It is intuitively clear that one should not put all his eggs in the same basket. A diversiﬁed
portfolio, composed of different assets with small mutual correlations, is less risky because
the gains of some of the assets more or less compensate the loss of the others. Now, an
investment with a small risk and small return must sometimes be preferred to a high yield,
but very risky, investment.
The theoretical justiﬁcation for the idea of diversiﬁcation comes again from the CLT. A
portfolio made up of M uncorrelated assets and of equal volatility, with weight 1/M, has an
overall volatility reduced by a factor
√
M. Correspondingly, the amplitude (and duration) of
the worst drawdown is divided by a factor M (cf. Eq. (10.30)), which is obviously satisfying.
This qualitative idea stumbles over several difﬁculties. First of all, the ﬂuctuations of ﬁ-
nancial assets are in general strongly correlated; this substantially decreases the possibility
of true diversiﬁcation, and requires a suitable theory to deal with these correlations and
construct an ‘optimal’ portfolio: this is Markowitz’s theory, to be detailed in Chapter 12.
Furthermore, since price ﬂuctuations can be strongly non-Gaussian, a volatility-based mea-
sure of risk might be unadapted: one should rather try to minimize the value-at-risk, or the
expected shortfall, of the portfolio. It is therefore interesting to look for an extension of
the classical formalism, allowing one to devise minimum VaR portfolios. This will also be
presented in Chapter 12.
One is thus in general confronted with the problem of deﬁning properly an ‘optimal’
portfolio. Usually, one invokes the rather abstract concept of ‘utility functions’, on which
we shall brieﬂy comment in this section, in particular to show that it does not naturally
accommodate for the notion of value-at-risk or expected shortfall.
We will call WT the wealth of a given operator at time t = T . If one argues that the level
of satisfaction of this operator is quantiﬁed by a certain function of WT only, which one
usually calls the utility function U(WT ). Note that one assumes that the satisfaction does
not depend on the whole ‘history’ of the wealth between t = 0 and T . One thus assumes
that the operator is insensitive to what can happen between these two dates. This is not very
realistic and a generalization to path dependent utility functionals U({W(t)}0≤t≤T ) could
change signiﬁcantly some of the following discussion.
The utility function U(WT ) is furthermore taken to be continuous and even twice differ-
entiable. The postulated ‘rational’ behaviour for the operator is then to look for investments
which maximize his expected utility, averaged over all possible histories of price changes:
⟨U(WT )⟩=

P(WT )U(WT ) dWT .
(10.32)
The utility function should be non-decreasing: a larger proﬁt is clearly always more satisfy-
ing. One can furthermore consider the case where the distribution P(WT ) is sharply peaked
around its mean value ⟨WT ⟩= W0 + mT . Performing a Taylor expansion of ⟨U(WT )⟩

182
Risk measures
around U(W0 + mT ) to second order, one ﬁnds:
⟨U(WT )⟩=

U(W0 + mT + ε)P(ε) dε ≈U(W0 + mT ) + 1
2
d2U
dW 2

W0+mT
⟨ε2⟩+ . . . ,
(10.33)
where we have used that ⟨ε⟩= 0. On the other hand ⟨ε2⟩measures the uncertainty on the
ﬁnal wealth, which should also degrade the satisfaction of the agent. One deduces that the
utility function must be such that:
d2U
dW 2 < 0.
(10.34)
This property reﬂects the fact that for the same average return, a less risky investment should
always be preferred.†
A simple example of utility function compatible with the above constraints is the expo-
nential function U(WT ) = −exp[−WT /w0]. Note that w0 has the dimensions of a wealth,
thereby ﬁxing a wealth scale in the problem. A natural candidate is the initial wealth of the
operator, w0 ∝W0. If P(WT ) is Gaussian, of mean W0 + mT and variance DT , one ﬁnds
that the expected utility is given by:
⟨U⟩= −exp

−W0
w0
−T
w0

m −
D
2w0

.
(10.35)
One could think of constructing a utility function with no intrinsic wealth scale by choosing
a power-law: U(WT ) = (WT /w0)α with α < 1 to ensure the correct convexity. Indeed, in
this case a change of w0 can be reabsorbed in a change of scale of the utility function itself,
which is arbitrary. The choice α = 0 corresponds to Bernouilli’s logarithmic utility function
U(WT ) = log(WT ). However, these deﬁnitions cannot allow for negative ﬁnal wealths, and
is thus sometimes problematic.
Despite the fact that these postulates sound reasonable, and despite the very large number
of academic studies based on the concept of utility function, this axiomatic approach suffers
from a certain number of fundamental ﬂaws. For example, it is not clear that one could ever
measure the utility function used by a given agent. ‡ The theoretical results are thus:
r Either relatively weak, because independent of the special form of the utility function,
and only based on its general properties.
r Or rather arbitrary, because based on a speciﬁc, but unjustiﬁed, form for U(WT ).
On the other hand, the idea that the utility function is regular is probably not always real-
istic. The satisfaction of an operator is often governed by rather sharp thresholds, separated
† This is however not obvious when one considers path dependent utilities, since a more volatile stock leads to
the possibility of larger potential proﬁts if the reselling time is not a priori determined.
‡ Even the idea that an operator would really optimize his expected utility, and not take decisions partly based
on ‘non-rational’, ‘random’ motivations, is far from obvious. On this point, see e.g.: Kahnemann & Tversky
(1979), Marsili & Zhang (1997), Shleifer (2000).

10.5 Diversiﬁcation and utility – satisfaction thresholds
183
-10.0
-8.0
-6.0
-4.0
-2.0
0.0
2.0
∆W
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
U(∆W)
Fig. 10.5. Example of a utility function with thresholds, where the utility function is
non-continuous. These thresholds correspond to special values for the proﬁt, or the loss, and are
often of purely psychological origin.
by regions of indifference (Fig. 10.5).† For example, one can be in a situation where a
speciﬁc project can only be funded if the proﬁt W = WT −W0 exceeds a certain amount.
Symmetrically, the clients of a fund manager will take their money away as soon as the
losses exceed a certain value: this is the strategy of ‘stop-losses’, which ﬁx a level for
acceptable losses, beyond which the position is closed. The existence of option markets
(which allow one to limit the potential losses below a certain level – see Chapter 13), or of
items the price of which is $99 rather than $100, are concrete examples of the existence of
these psychological thresholds where ‘satisfaction’ changes abruptly. Therefore, the utility
function U is not necessarily continuous. This remark is actually intimately related to the
fact that the value-at-risk is often a better measure of risk than the variance. Let us indeed
assume that the operator is ‘happy’ if W > − and ‘unhappy’ whenever W < −.
This corresponds formally to the following utility function:
U(W) =
U1 (W > −)
U2 (W < −) ,
(10.36)
with U2 −U1 < 0.
The expected utility is then simply related to the loss probability:
⟨U⟩= U1 + (U2 −U1)
 −
−∞
P(W) dW
= U1 −|U2 −U1|P.
(10.37)
Therefore, optimizing the expected utility is in this case tantamount to minimizing the
probability of losing more that . Despite this rather appealing property, which certainly
corresponds to the behaviour of some market operators, the function U(W) does not
† It is possible that the presence of these thresholds actually plays an important role in the fact that the price
ﬂuctuations are strongly non-Gaussian.

184
Risk measures
satisfy the above criteria (continuity and negative curvature). The same remark would hold
for the expected shortfall, that corresponds to replacing U2 by U2 × W in Eq. (10.36).
Confronted to the problem of choosing between risk (as measured by the variance) and
return, a very natural strategy for those not acquainted with utility functions would be to
compare the average return to the potential loss
√
DT . This can thus be thought of as
deﬁning a risk-corrected, ‘pessimistic’ estimate of the proﬁt, as:
mλT = mT −λ
√
DT ,
(10.38)
where λ is an arbitrary coefﬁcient that measures the pessimism (or the risk aversion) of
the operator. A rather natural criterion would then be to look for the optimal portfolio that
maximizes the risk adjusted return mλ. However, this optimal portfolio cannot be obtained
using the standard utility function formalism. For example, Eq. (10.35) shows that the object
whichshouldbemaximizedinthecontextthisparticularutilityfunctionis notmT −λ
√
DT
but rather mT −DT/2w0. This amounts to comparing the average proﬁt to the square of
the potential losses, divided by the reference wealth scale w0 – a quantity that depends a
priori on the operator.† On the other hand, the quantity mT −λ
√
DT is directly related (at
least in a Gaussian world) to the value-at-risk ∗, cf. Eq. (10.22).
This argument can be expressed slightly differently: a reasonable objective could be to
maximize the value of the probable gain Gp, such that the probability of earning more is
equal to a certain probability p:‡
 +∞
Gp
P(W) dW = p.
(10.39)
In the case where P(W) is Gaussian, this amounts again to maximizing mT −λ
√
DT ,
where λ is related to p in a simple manner. Now, one can show that it is impossible to
construct a utility function such that, in the general case, different strategies can be ordered
according to their probable gain Gp. Therefore, the concepts of loss probability, value-at-
risk or probable gain cannot be accommodated naturally within the framework of utility
functions.
10.6 Summary
r The simplest measure of risk is the volatility σ. Compared to the average return ˜m,
this deﬁnes a ‘security’ time horizon ˆT = σ 2/ ˜m2 beyond which the probability of
loss becomes small. Correspondingly, the typical drawdown amplitude is σ 2/ ˜m.
r The volatility is not always adapted to the real world. The tails of the distributions,
where the large events lie, are very badly described by a Gaussian law: this leads to
† This comparison is actually meaningful, since it corresponds to comparing the reference wealth w0 to the order
of magnitude of the worst drawdown D/m, cf. Eq. (10.30).
‡ Maximizing Gp is thus equivalent to minimizing ∗such that P∗= 1 −p. Note that one could alternatively
try to maximize the probability p that a certain gain G is achieved.

10.6 Summary
185
a systematic underestimation of the extreme risks. Sometimes, the measurement of
volatility using historical data is difﬁcult, precisely because of the presence of these
large ﬂuctuations.
r Themeasureofriskthroughtheprobabilityofloss,value-at-risk,orexpectedshortfall
on the other hand, focus speciﬁcally on the tails. Extreme events are considered as
the true source of risk, whereas the small ﬂuctuations that contribute to the ‘centre’ of
the distributions (and contribute to the volatility) can be seen as background noise,
inherent to the very activity of ﬁnancial markets, but not relevant for risk assessment.
r From a theoretical point of view, these deﬁnitions of risk (based on extreme events)
do not easily ﬁt into the classical utility function framework. The minimization of
a loss probability rather assumes that there exist well-deﬁned thresholds (possibly
different for each operator) where the utility function is discontinuous. The concept
of value-at-risk, or probable gain, cannot be naturally dealt with using classical utility
functions.
r Further reading
C. Alexander, Market Models: A Guide to Financial Data Analysis, John Wiley, 2001.
L. Bachelier, Th´eorie de la Sp´eculation, Gabay, Paris, 1995.
M. Dempster, Value at Risk and Beyond, Cambridge University Press, 2001.
P. Embrechts, C. Kl¨uppelberg, T. Mikosch, Modelling Extremal Events for Insurance and Finance,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1997.
W. Feller, An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, Wiley, New York, 1971.
J. Galambos, The Asymptotic Theory of Extreme Order Statistics, R. E. Krieger Publishing Co.,
Malabar, Florida, 1987.
E. J. Gumbel, Statistics of Extremes, Columbia University Press, New York, 1958.
P. Jorion, Value at Risk: The New Benchmark for Managing Financial Risk, McGraw-Hill, 2nd edition,
2000.
A. Shleifer, Inefﬁcient Markets, An Introduction to Behavioral Finance, Oxford University Press,
2000.
r Specialized papers
C. Acerbi, D. Tasche, On the coherence of Expected Shortfall, e-print cond-mat/0104295.
P. Artzner, F. Delbaen, J.-M. Eber, D. Heath, Coherent measures of risk, Mathematical Finance, 9,
203 (1999).
V. Bawa, Optimal rules for ordering uncertain prospects, J. Fin. Eco., 2, 95 (1975).
S. Galluccio, J.-P. Bouchaud, M. Potters, Rational decisions, random matrices and spin glasses,
Physica A, 259, 449 (1998).
D. Kahnemann, A. Tversky, Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk, Econometrica, 47,
263 (1979).
M. Marsili, Y. C. Zhang, Fluctuations around Nash equilibria in game theory, Physica A, 245, 181
(1997).
R. T. Rockafellar, S. Uryasev, Conditional value-at-risk for general loss distributions, Journal of
Banking & Finance, 26, 1443 (2001).
D. Tasche, Expected Shortfall and Beyond, e-print cond-mat/0203558.
