13
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
Les personnes non averties sont sujettes `a se laisser induire en erreur.†
(Lord Raglan, ‘Le tabou de l’inceste’, quoted by Boris Vian in L’automne `a
P´ekin.)
13.1 Introduction
13.1.1 Aim of the chapter
The aim of this chapter is to introduce the general theory of derivative pricing in a simple
and intuitive, but rather unconventional, way. The usual presentation, which can be found
in all the available books on the subject,‡ relies on particular models where it is possible to
construct riskless hedging strategies, which replicate exactly the corresponding derivative
product.§ Since the risk is strictly zero, there is no ambiguity in the price of the derivative:
it is equal to the cost of the hedging strategy. In the general case, however, these ‘perfect’
strategies do not exist. Not surprisingly for the layman, zero risk is the exception rather
than the rule. Correspondingly, a suitable theory must include risk as an essential feature,
which one would like to minimize. The following chapters thus aim at developing simple
methods to obtain optimal strategies, residual risks, and prices of derivative products, which
take into account in an adequate way the peculiar statistical nature of ﬁnancial markets, that
have been described in Chapters 6, 7, 8.
13.1.2 Strategies in uncertain conditions
A derivative product is an asset the value of which depends on the price history of another
asset, the ‘underlying’. The best known examples, on which the following chapters will
focus in detail, are futures and options. For example, one could sell a contract (called a
‘digital’ option) which pays $1 whenever the price of – say – gold exceeds some given
value at a time T in the future, and zero otherwise. This is a derivative. Obviously, one can
† Unwarned people may easily be fooled.
‡ See e.g. Hull (1997), Wilmott (1998), Baxter & Rennie (1996) and Chapter 16.
§ A hedging strategy is a trading strategy allowing one to reduce, and sometimes eliminate, the risk.

13.1 Introduction
227
invent a great number of such contracts, with different rules – some of them will be detailed
in Chapter 17.
Now, the obvious question that the seller of such a derivative asks himself is: how much
money will I make, or lose, when the contract has expired?
Since the answer is by deﬁnition uncertain, a more precise question is: what is
the probability distribution P(W) of the wealth balance W for the seller of the
contract?
The more heavily skewed towards the positive side, the better for the seller of the contract.
The interesting point is that the seller can craft, to some extent, the distribution P(W),
such as to reach a shape which is optimal given his risk constraints. For example, if he raises
the price of the contract (and is still able to sell it), the distribution will obviously shift to
the right, but without changing shape (see Fig. 13.1). Less trivially, the seller can follow
certain trading strategies that also narrow the distribution, or reduce the weight of the left
tail (Fig. 13.1). The optimal strategy will depend on the shape one wishes to achieve, as we
shall illustrate in the following.
From a general point of view, the shape of P(W) can be characterized by its different
moments. The average of P(W) is obviously the expected gain (or loss) from selling the
∆W
P(∆W)
Initial
Shifted
Narrowed
Skewed
Fig. 13.1. Chiseling distributions: Generic form of the distribution of the wealth balance P(W)
associated to a certain ﬁnancial operation, such as writing an option. By increasing the price of the
option, the seller can shift P(W) to the right. By hedging the option, the seller can narrow
P(W), and sometimes even affect its skewness.

228
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
contract. The variance of P(W) is the simplest measure of the uncertainty of the ﬁnal
wealth of the seller, and is therefore often taken as a measure of risk. If this deﬁnition
of risk is deemed suitable, the hedging strategy should be such that the variance of the
wealth balance is minimum. On the other hand, one if often worried about tail events, in
particular the left tail. In this case, measures that include the third cumulant (skewness)
or the fourth cumulant (kurtosis) of the wealth balance could be more adapted, or criteria
based on value-at-risk or expected shortfall (see Section 10.3.3). The main idea to remember
is that in general, the problem of derivative pricing and hedging has no unique solution,
because the ‘optimal shape’ of the distribution of W will very much depend on one’s
perception of risk. The perception of risk of the buyer and the seller of the contract are in
general different: this in fact makes the trade possible.
In a sense, ﬁnance is the art of chiseling probability distributions. Only in very special
cases will the solution be unique: when a perfect strategy exists, such that P(W) can be
made inﬁnitely sharp around a certain value, in which case the risk is zero according to all
possible deﬁnitions. In this case, the only possible price for the contract is such that the
average of P(W) is also zero, otherwise a riskless proﬁt (called an arbitrage opportunity)
would follow, either for the seller if the contract is overpriced, or for the buyer if the contract
is underpriced. These special zero risk situations will appear below, in the context of futures
contracts, or in the case of options within the Black-Scholes model.
13.1.3 Trading strategies and efﬁcient markets
In the previous chapters, we have insisted on the fact that if the detailed prediction of future
market moves is probably impossible, its statistical description is a reasonable and useful
idea,atleastasaﬁrstapproximation.Thisapproachonlyreliesonacertaindegreeofstability
(in time) in the way markets behave and the prices evolve. A reasonable hypothesis is that
the statistical ‘texture’ of the markets (i.e. the shape of the probability distributions) is stable
over time, but that the parameters which ﬁx the amplitude of the ﬂuctuations can be time
dependent – see Chapter 7 and Section 13.3.4. Let us thus assume that one can determine
(using a statistical analysis of past time series) the probability density P(x, t|x0, t0), which
gives the probability that the price of the asset X is equal to x (to within dx) at time t,
knowing that at a previous time t0, the price was equal to x0. As in previous chapters, we
shall denote as ⟨O⟩the average (over the ‘historical’ probability distribution) of a certain
observable O:
⟨O(x, t)⟩≡

P(x, t|x0, 0)O(x, t) dx.
(13.1)
As we have shown in Section 6.2.2, the price ﬂuctuations are somewhat correlated for
small time intervals (a few minutes), but become rapidly uncorrelated (but not necessarily
independent!) on longer time scales. In the following, we shall choose as our elementary
time scale τ an interval a few times larger than the correlation time – say τ = 30 minute
on liquid markets. We shall thus assume that the correlations of price increments on two

13.1 Introduction
229
different intervals of size τ are negligible.† When correlations are small, the information on
future movements based on the study of past ﬂuctuations is weak. In this case, no systematic
trading strategy can be more proﬁtable (on the long run) than holding the market index – of
course, one can temporarily ‘beat’ the market through sheer luck. This property corresponds
to the efﬁcient market hypothesis.‡
It is interesting to translate this property into more formal terms. Let us suppose that
at time tn = nτ, an investor has a portfolio containing, in particular, a quantity φn(xn)
of the asset X, quantity which can depend on the price of the asset xn = x(tn) at time
tn (this strategy could actually depend on the price of the asset for all previous times:
φn(xn, xn−1, xn−2, . . .)). Between tn and tn+1, the price of X varies by δxn. This generates
a proﬁt (or a loss) for the investor equal to φn(xn)δxn. Note that the change of wealth is
not equal to δ(φx) = φδx + xδφ, since the second term only corresponds to converting
some stocks in cash, or vice versa, but not to a real change of wealth. The wealth difference
between time t = 0 and time tN = T = Nτ, due to the trading of asset X is, for zero interest
rates, equal to:
WX =
N−1

n=0
φn(xn)δxn.
(13.2)
Now, we assume that price returns are random variables following a multiplicative model:
δxk
xk
≡ηk = m + ϵkσk,
(13.3)
where ϵk are iid random variables of zero mean and unit variance, and σk corresponds to the
local volatility of the ﬂuctuations, which can be correlated in time and also, possibly, with
the random variables ϵ j with j < k (see Chapter 8). The point however here is that the ϵk
are unpredictable from the knowledge of any past information. Since the trading strategy
φn(xn) can only be chosen before the price actually changes, the absence of correlations
means that the average value of WX (with respect to the historical probability distribution)
reads:
⟨WX⟩=
N−1

n=0
⟨φn(xn)δxn⟩≡mτ
N−1

n=0
⟨xnφn(xn)⟩,
(13.4)
where m is the average return of the asset X, deﬁned in (13.3).
The above equation (13.4) thus means that the average value of the proﬁt is ﬁxed by
the average return of the asset, weighted by the level of investment across the considered
period.
† The presence of small correlations on larger time scales is however difﬁcult to exclude, in particular on the scale
of several years, which might reﬂect economic cycles for example. Note also that the ‘volatility’ ﬂuctuations
exhibit long-range correlations – cf. Section 7.2.2.
‡ The existence of successful systematic hedge funds, which have consistently produced returns higher than the
average for several years, suggests that some sort of ‘hidden’ correlations do exist, at least on certain markets.
But if they exist these correlations must be small and therefore are not relevant for our concern, at least in a ﬁrst
approximation.

230
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
Trading in the presence of temporal correlations
It is interesting to investigate the case where correlations are not zero. For simplicity,
we shall assume an additive model where the ﬂuctuations δxn are stationary Gaussian
variables of zero mean (m1 = 0). The correlation function is then given by ⟨δxnδxk⟩≡
Cnk. The C−1
nk ’s are the elements of the matrix inverse of C. If one knows the sequence
of past increments δx0, . . . , δxn−1, the distribution of the next δxn conditioned to such
an observation is simply given by:
P(δxn) = N exp −C−1
nn
2 [δxn −mn]2,
(13.5)
mn ≡−
n−1
i=0 C−1
in δxi
C−1
nn
,
(13.6)
where N is a normalization factor, and mn the mean of δxn conditioned to the past,
which is non-zero precisely because some correlations are present.† A simple strategy
which exploits these correlations is to choose:
φn(xn, xn−1, . . .) = sign(mn),
(13.7)
which means that one buys (resp. sells) one stock if the expected next increment is
positive (resp. negative). The average proﬁt is then obviously given by ⟨|mn|⟩> 0. We
further assume that the correlations are short ranged, such that only C−1
nn and C−1
nn−1 are
non-zero. The unit time interval is then the above correlation time τ. If this strategy is
used during the time T = Nτ, the average proﬁt is given by:
⟨WX⟩= Na⟨|δx|⟩where a ≡

C−1
nn−1
C−1
nn
 ,
(13.8)
(a does not depend on n for a stationary process). With typical values, τ = 30 min,
⟨|δx|⟩≈10−3 x0, and a of about 0.1 (cf. Section 6.2.2), the average proﬁt would reach
50% annual!‡ Hence, the presence of correlations (even rather weak) allows in prin-
ciple one to make rather substantial gains. However, one should remember that some
transaction costs are always present in some form or other (see Section 5.3.6). Since
our assumption is that the correlation time is equal to τ, it means that the frequency
with which our trader has to ‘ﬂip’ his strategy (i.e. φ →−φ) is τ −1. One should thus
subtract from Eq. (13.8) a term on the order of −Nνx0, where ν represents the frac-
tional cost of a transaction. A very small value of the order of 10−4 is thus enough to
cancel completely the proﬁt resulting from the observed correlations on the markets.
Interestingly enough, the ‘basis point’ (10−4) is precisely the order of magnitude of the
friction faced by traders with the most direct access to the markets. More generally,
transaction costs allow the existence of correlations, and thus of ‘theoretical’ inefﬁcien-
cies of the markets. The strength of the ‘allowed’ correlations on a certain time T is
on the order of the transaction costs ν divided by the volatility of the asset on the scale
of T .
† The notation mn has already been used in Chapter 1 with a different meaning. Note also that a general formula
exists for the distribution of δxn+k for all k ≥0, and can be found in books on optimal ﬁlter theory, see references.
‡ A strategy that allows one to generate consistent abnormal returns with zero or minimal risk is called an arbitrage
opportunity.

13.2 Futures and forwards
231
At this stage, it would appear that devising a ‘theory’ for trading is useless: in the absence
of correlations, speculating on stock markets is tantamount to playing the roulette (the zero
playing the role of transaction costs!). In fact, as will be discussed in the present chapter, the
existence of riskless assets such as bonds, which yield a known return, and the emergence
of more complex ﬁnancial products such as futures contracts or options, demand an adapted
theory for pricing and hedging. This theory turns out to be predictive, even in the complete
absence of temporal correlations.
13.2 Futures and forwards
13.2.1 Setting the stage
Before turning to the rather complex case of options, we shall ﬁrst focus on the very simple
case of forward contracts, which allows us to deﬁne a certain number of notions (such as
arbitrage and hedging) and notations. A forward, or futures contract F amounts to buying
or selling today an asset X (the ‘underlying’) with payment and delivery at a date T = Nτ
in the future (see Section 5.2.6). What is the price F of this contract, knowing that it must
be paid at the date of expiry?† The naive answer that ﬁrst comes to mind is a ‘fair game’
condition: the price must be adjusted such that, on average, the two parties involved in the
contract fall even on the day of expiry. For example, taking the point of view of the writer
of the contract (who sells the forward), the wealth balance associated with the forward
reads:
WF = F −x(T ).
(13.9)
This actually assumes that the writer has not considered the possibility of simultaneously
trading the underlying stock X to reduce his risk, which of course he should do, see
below.
Under this assumption, the fair game condition amounts to set ⟨WF⟩= 0, which gives
for the forward price:
FB = ⟨x(T )⟩≡

x P(x, T |x0, 0) dx,
(13.10)
if the price of X is x0 at time t = 0. This price, that can we shall call the ‘Bachelier’ price,
is not satisfactory since the seller takes the risk that the price at expiry x(T ) ends up far
above ⟨x(T )⟩, which could prompt him to increase his price above FB.
Actually, the Bachelier price FB is not related to the market price for a simple reason: the
seller of the contract can suppress his risk completely if he buys now the underlying asset
X at price x0 and waits for the expiry date. However, this strategy is costly: the amount
of cash frozen during that period does not yield the riskless interest rate. The cost of the
strategy is thus x0erT , where r is the interest rate per unit time. From the view point of the
buyer, it would certainly be absurd to pay more than x0erT , which is the cost of borrowing
† Note that if the contract was to be paid now, its price would be exactly equal to that of the underlying asset
(barring the risk of delivery default and neglecting cost and beneﬁts of ownership such as dividends).

232
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
the cash needed to pay the asset right away. The only viable price for the forward contract is
thus F = x0erT ̸= FB, and is, in this particular case, completely unrelated to the potential
moves of the asset X!
An elementary argument thus allows one to know the price of the forward contract and to
follow a perfect hedging strategy: buy a quantity φ = 1 of the underlying asset during the
whole life of the contract. The aim of next paragraph is to establish this rather trivial result,
which has not required any maths, in a much more sophisticated way. The importance of
this procedure is that one needs to learn how to write down a proper wealth balance in order
to price more complex derivative products such as options, on which we shall focus in the
next sections.
13.2.2 Global ﬁnancial balance
Let us write a general ﬁnancial balance which takes into account the trading strategy of the
the underlying asset X. The difﬁculty lies in the fact that the amount φnxn which is invested
in the asset X rather than in bonds is effectively costly: one ‘misses’ the risk-free interest
rate. Furthermore, this loss cumulates in time. It is not a priori obvious how to write down
the correct balance. Suppose that only two assets have to be considered: the risky asset X,
and a bond B. The whole capital Wn at time tn = nτ is shared between these two assets:
Wn ≡φnxn + Bn.
(13.11)
The time evolution of Wn is due both to the change of price of the asset X, and to the fact
that the bond yields a known return through the interest rate r:
Wn+1 −Wn = φn(xn+1 −xn) + Bnρ,
ρ = rτ.
(13.12)
On the other hand, the amount of capital in bonds evolves both mechanically, through the
effect of the interest rate (+Bnρ), but also because the quantity of stock does change in
time (φn →φn+1), and causes a ﬂow of money from bonds to stock or vice versa. Hence:
Bn+1 −Bn = Bnρ −xn+1(φn+1 −φn).
(13.13)
Note that Eq. (13.11) is obviously compatible with the following two equations. The solution
of the second equation reads:
Bn = (1 + ρ)n B0 −
n

k=1
xk(φk −φk−1)(1 + ρ)n−k.
(13.14)
Plugging this result in Eq. (13.11), and renaming k −1 →k in the second part of the sum,
one ﬁnally ends up with the following central result for Wn:

13.2 Futures and forwards
233
Wn = W0(1 + ρ)n +
n−1

k=0
ψn
k (xk+1 −xk −ρxk),
(13.15)
with ψn
k ≡φk(1 + ρ)n−k−1.
This last expression has an intuitive meaning: the gain or loss incurred between time k
and k + 1 must include the cost of the hedging strategy −ρxk; furthermore, this gain or
loss must be forwarded up to time n through interest rate effects, hence the extra factor
(1 + ρ)n−k−1. Another useful way to write and understand Eq. (13.15) is to introduce the
discounted prices ˜xk ≡xk(1 + ρ)−k. One then has:
Wn = (1 + ρ)n

W0 +
n−1

k=0
φk(˜xk+1 −˜xk)

.
(13.16)
The effect of interest rates can be thought of as an erosion of the value of the money itself.
The discounted prices ˜xk are therefore the ‘true’ prices, and the difference ˜xk+1 −˜xk the
‘true’ change of wealth. The overall factor (1 + ρ)n then converts this true wealth into the
current value of the money.
The global balance associated with the forward contract contains two further terms: the
price of the forward F that one wishes to determine, and the price of the underlying asset
at the delivery date. Hence, ﬁnally:
WN = F −xN + (1 + ρ)N

W0 +
N−1

k=0
φk(˜xk+1 −˜xk)

.
(13.17)
Since by identity ˜xN = N−1
k=0 (˜xk+1 −˜xk) + x0, this last expression can also be written as:
WN = F + (1 + ρ)N

W0 −x0 +
N−1

k=0
(φk −1)(˜xk+1 −˜xk)

.
(13.18)
13.2.3 Riskless hedge
In this last formula, all the randomness, the uncertainty on the future evolution of the prices,
only appears in the last term. But if one chooses φk to be identically equal to one, then the
global balance is completely independent of the evolution of the stock price. The ﬁnal result
is not random, and reads:
WN = F + (1 + ρ)N(W0 −x0).
(13.19)
Now, the wealth of the writer of the forward contract at time T = Nτ cannot be, with
certitude, greater (or less) than the one he would have had if the contract had not been
signed, i.e. W0(1 + ρ)N. If this was the case, one of the two parties would be losing money
in a totally predictable fashion (since Eq. (13.19) does not contain any unknown term).

234
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
Since any reasonable participant is reluctant to give away his money with no hope of return,
one concludes that the forward price is indeed given by:
F = x0(1 + ρ)N ≈x0erT ̸= FB,
(13.20)
which does not rely on any statistical information on the price of X!
Dividends
In the case of a stock that pays a constant dividend rate δ = dτ per interval of time τ,
the global wealth balance is obviously changed into:
WN = F −xN + W0(1 + ρ)N +
N−1

k=0
ψ N
k (xk+1 −xk + (δ −ρ)xk).
(13.21)
It is easy to redo the above calculations in this case. One ﬁnds that the riskless strategy
is now to hold:
φk ≡(1 + ρ −δ)N−k−1
(1 + ρ)N−k−1
(13.22)
stocks. The wealth balance breaks even if the price of the forward is set to:
F = x0(1 + ρ −δ)N ≈x0e(r−d)T ,
(13.23)
which again could have been obtained using a simple no arbitrage argument of the type
presented below.
Variable interest rates
In reality, the interest rate is not constant in time but rather also varies randomly. More
precisely, as explained in Chapter 19, at any instant of time the whole interest rate curve
for different maturities is known, but evolves with time. The generalization of the global
balance, as given by formula Eq. (13.17), depends on the maturity of the bonds included
in the portfolio, and thus on the whole interest rate curve. Assuming that only short-term
bonds are included, yielding the (time-dependent) ‘spot’ rate ρk, one has:
WN = F −xN + W0
N−1

k=0
(1 + ρk)
+
N−1

k=0
ψ N
k (xk+1 −xk −ρkxk),
(13.24)
with: ψ N
k ≡φk
N−1
ℓ=k+1(1 + ρℓ). It is again quite obvious that holding a quantity φk ≡1
of the underlying asset leads to zero risk in the sense that the ﬂuctuations of X disappear.
However,theabovestrategyisnotimmunetointerestraterisk.Theinterestingcomplexity
of interest rate problems (such as the pricing and hedging of interest rate derivatives)
comes from the fact that one may choose bonds of arbitrary maturity to construct the

13.2 Futures and forwards
235
hedging strategy. In the present case, one may take a bond of maturity equal to that of
the forward. In this case, risk disappears entirely, and the price of the forward reads:
F =
x0
B(0, T ),
(13.25)
where B(0, T ) stands for the value, at time 0, of the bond maturing at time T = Nτ.
13.2.4 Conclusion: global balance and arbitrage
From the simple example of forward contracts, one should bear in mind the following
points, which are the key concepts underlying the derivative pricing theory as presented
in this book. After writing down the complete ﬁnancial balance, taking into account the
trading of all assets used to cover the risk, it is quite natural (at least from the view point
of the writer of the contract) to determine the trading strategy for all the hedging assets
so as to minimize the risk associated to the contract (see the discussion in Section 13.1.2).
After doing so, a reference price is obtained by demanding that the global balance is
zero on average, corresponding to a fair price from the point of view of both parties. In
certain cases (such as the forward contracts described above), the minimum risk is zero
and the true market price cannot differ from the fair price, or else arbitrage would be
possible. On the example of forward contracts, the price, Eq. (13.20), indeed corresponds
to the absence of arbitrage opportunities (AAO), that is, of riskless proﬁt. Suppose for
example that the price of the forward is below F = x0(1 + ρ)N. One can then sell the
underlying asset now at price x0 and simultaneously buy the forward at a price F′ < F,
that must be paid for on the delivery date. The cash x0 is used to buy bonds with a yield
rate ρ. On the expiry date, the forward contract is used to buy back the stock and close
the position. The wealth of the trader is then x0(1 + ρ)N −F′, which is positive under
our assumption – and furthermore fully determined at time zero: there is proﬁt, but no risk.
Similarly, a price F′ > F would also lead to an opportunity of arbitrage. More generally,
if the hedging strategy is perfect, this means that the ﬁnal wealth is known in advance.
Thus, increasing the price as compared to the fair price leads to a riskless proﬁt for the
seller of the contract, and vice versa. This AAO principle is at the heart of most derivative
pricing theories currently used. Unfortunately, this principle cannot be used in the general
case, where the minimal risk is non-zero, or when transaction costs are present (and absorb
the potential proﬁt, see the discussion in Section 13.1.3 above). When the risk is non-
zero, there exists a fundamental ambiguity in the price, since one should expect that a risk
premium is added to the fair price (for example, as a bid-ask spread). This risk premium
depends both on the risk-averseness of the market maker, but also on the liquidity of
the derivative market: if the price asked by one market maker is too high, less greedy
market makers will make the deal. However, this mechanism does not operate for ‘over-
the-counter’ operations (OTC, that is between two individual parties, as opposed to through
an organized market). We shall come back to this important discussion in Section 15.4.1
below.

236
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
Let us emphasize that the proper accounting of all ﬁnancial elements in the wealth
balance is crucial to obtain the correct fair price.
For example, we have seen above that if one forgets the term corresponding to the
trading of the underlying stock, one ends up with the intuitive, but wrong, Bachelier price,
Eq. (13.10).
13.3 Options: deﬁnition and valuation
13.3.1 Setting the stage
As mentioned in Section 5.2.6, a buy option (or ‘call’ option) is an insurance policy, protect-
ing the owner against the potential increase of the price of a given asset, which he will need
to buy in the future. The call option provides to its owner the certainty of not paying the
asset more than a certain price. Symmetrically, a ‘put’ option protects against drawdowns,
by insuring to the owner a minimum value for his stock.
More precisely, in the case of a so-called ‘European’ option,† the contract is such that at
a given date in the future (the ‘expiry date’ or ‘maturity’) t = T , the owner of the option
will not pay the asset more than xs (the ‘exercise price’, or ‘strike’ price). Knowing that the
price of the underlying asset is x0 now (i.e. at t = 0), what is the price (or ‘premium’) C of
the call? What is the optimal hedging strategy that the writer of the option should follow in
order to minimize his risk?
The very ﬁrst scientiﬁc theory of option pricing dates back to Bachelier in 1900. His
proposal was, following a fair game argument, that the option price should equal the av-
erage value of the pay-off of the contract at expiry. Bachelier calculated this average by
assuming the price increments δxn to be independent Gaussian random variables, which
leads to the formula, Eq. (13.43) below. However, Bachelier did not discuss the possibility
of hedging, and therefore did not include in his wealth balance the term corresponding to
the trading strategy that we have discussed in the previous section. As we have seen, this
is precisely the term responsible for the difference between the forward ‘Bachelier price’
FB (cf. Eq. (13.10)) and the true price, Eq. (13.20). The problem of the optimal trading
strategy must thus, in principle, be solved before one can ﬁx the price of the option.‡ This
is the problem that was solved by Black and Scholes in 1973, when they showed that for a
continuous-time Gaussian process, there exists a perfect strategy, in the sense that the risk
associated to writing an option is strictly zero, as is the case for forward contracts. The
determination of this perfect hedging strategy allows one to ﬁx completely the price of the
option using an AAO argument. Unfortunately, as repeatedly discussed below, this ideal
† Many other types of options exist: ‘American’, ‘Asian’, ‘Lookback’, ‘Digitals’, etc. (Nelken (1996)). We will
discuss some of them in Chapter 17.
‡ In practice, however, the inﬂuence of the trading strategy on the price (but not on the risk!) is quite small, see
below.

13.3 Options: deﬁnition and valuation
237
strategy only exists in a continuous-time, Gaussian world,† that is, if the market correlation
time was inﬁnitely short, and if no discontinuities in the market price were allowed – both
assumptions rather remote from reality. The hedging strategy cannot, in general, be perfect.
However, an optimal hedging strategy can always be found, for which the risk is minimal
(cf. Section 14.2). This optimal strategy thus allows one to calculate the fair price of the
option and the associated residual risk. One should nevertheless bear in mind that, as empha-
sized in Sections 13.2.4 and 14.6, there is no such thing as a unique option price whenever
the risk is non-zero.
Let us now discuss these ideas more precisely. Following the method and notations
introduced in the previous section, we write the global wealth balance for the writer of an
option between time t = 0 and t = T as:
WN = [W0 + C](1 + ρ)N −max(xN −xs, 0)
+
N−1

k=0
ψ N
k (xk+1 −xk −ρxk),
(13.26)
which reﬂects the fact that:
r The premium C is paid immediately (i.e. at time t = 0).
r The writer of the option incurs a loss xN −xs only if the option is exercised (xN > xs).
r The hedging strategy requires that the writer convert a certain amount of bonds into the
underlying asset, as was discussed before Eq. (13.17).
A crucial difference with forward contracts comes from the non-linear nature of the
pay-off, which is equal, in the case of a European option, to Y(xN) ≡max(xN −xs, 0).
This must be contrasted with the forward pay-off, which is linear (and equal to xN). It is
ultimately the non-linearity of the pay-off which, combined with the non-Gaussian nature
of the ﬂuctuations, leads to a non-zero residual risk.
An equation for the call price C is obtained by requiring that the excess return due to
writing the option, W = WN −W0(1 + ρ)N, is zero on average:
(1 + ρ)NC =
	
⟨max(xN −xs, 0)⟩−
N−1

k=0
⟨ψ N
k (xk+1 −xk −ρxk)⟩

.
(13.27)
This price therefore depends, in principle, on the strategy ψ N
k = φN
k (1 + ρ)N−k−1. This
price corresponds to the fair price, to which a risk premium will in general be added (for
example in the form of a bid-ask spread).
In the rather common case where the underlying asset is not a stock but a forward on
the stock, the hedging strategy is less costly since only a small fraction f of the value of
the stock is required as a deposit. In the case where f = 0, the wealth balance appears to
† A property also shared by a discrete binomial evolution of prices, where at each time step, the price increment
δx can only take two values, see Chapter 16. However, the risk is non-zero as soon as the number of possible
price changes exceeds two.

238
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
take a simpler form, since the interest rate is not lost while trading the underlying forward
contract:
C = (1 + ρ)−N
	
⟨max(FN −xs, 0)⟩−
N−1

k=0
⟨φk(Fk+1 −Fk)⟩

.
(13.28)
However, one can check that if one expresses the price of the forward in terms of the
underlying stock, Eqs. (13.27) and (13.28) are actually identical. (Note in particular that
FN = xN.)
13.3.2 Orders of magnitude
Let us suppose that the maturity of the option is such that non-Gaussian ‘tail’ effects can
be neglected (this might in some cases correspond to quite long time scales), so that the
distribution of the terminal price x(T ) can be approximated by a Gaussian of mean mT and
variance DT = σ 2x2
0T .† If the average trend is small compared to the RMS
√
DT , a direct
calculation for ‘at-the-money’ options gives:‡
⟨max(x(T ) −xs, 0)⟩=
 ∞
xs
x −xs
√
2π DT
exp

−(x −x0 −mT )2
2DT

dx
≃

DT
2π + mT
2
+ O

m4T 3
D

.
(13.29)
Taking T = 100 days, a daily volatility of σ = 1%, an annual return of m = 5%, and a
stock such that x0 = 100 points, one gets:

DT
2π ≈4 points
mT
2
≈0.67 points.
(13.30)
In fact, the effect of a non-zero average return of the stock is much less than the above
estimation would suggest. The reason is that one must also take into account the last term of
the balance equation, Eq. (13.27), which comes from the hedging strategy. This term corrects
thepricebyanamount−⟨φ⟩mT .Now,asweshallseelater,theoptimalstrategyforanat-the-
money option is to hold, on average ⟨φ⟩= 1
2 stock per option. Hence, this term precisely
compensates the increase (equal to mT/2) of the average pay-off, ⟨max(x(T ) −xs, 0)⟩. This
strange compensation is actually exact in the Black–Scholes model (where the price of the
option turns out to be completely independent of the value of m) but only approximate in
more general cases. However, it is a very good ﬁrst approximation to neglect the dependence
of the option price in the average return of the stock: we shall come back to this important
point in detail in Section 15.1.
The interest rate appears in two different places in the balance equation, Eq. (13.27): in
front of the call premium C, and in the cost of the trading strategy. For ρ = rτ corresponding
† We again neglect the difference between Gaussian and log-normal statistics in the following order of magnitude
estimate.
‡ A call option is called at-the-money if the strike price is equal to the current price of the underlying stock
(xs = x0), out-of-the-money if xs > x0 and in-the-money if xs < x0.

13.3 Options: deﬁnition and valuation
239
to 5% per year, the factor (1 + ρ)N corrects the option price by a very small amount, which,
for T = 100 days, is equal to 0.06 points. However, the cost of the trading strategy is
not negligible. Its order of magnitude is ∼⟨φ⟩x0rT ; in the above numerical example, it
corresponds to a price increase of 2
3 of a point (16% of the option price), see Section 17.1.
13.3.3 Quantitative analysis – option price
We shall assume in the following that the price increments can be written as in Eq. (13.3):
xk+1 −xk = ρxk + δxk,
(13.31)
with δxk = σkϵkxk. The above order of magnitude estimate suggests that the inﬂuence of
a non-zero mean value of δxk leads to small corrections in comparison with the potential
ﬂuctuations of the stock price. We shall thus temporarily set ⟨ϵk⟩= 0 to simplify the fol-
lowing discussion, and come back to the corrections brought about by a non-zero value of
the average return in Chapter 15.
As already discussed above, the hedging strategy ψk must obviously be determined
before the next random change of price δxk. Since ϵk is assumed to be independent of all
past information, one has:
⟨ψkδxk⟩= ⟨ψkσkxk⟩⟨ϵk⟩= 0
(⟨ϵk⟩= 0).
(13.32)
In this case, the hedging strategy disappears from the price of the option, which is given
by the following ‘Bachelier’-like formula, generalized to the case where the increments are
not necessarily Gaussian:
C = (1 + ρ)−N⟨max(xN −xs, 0)⟩
≡(1 + ρ)−N
 ∞
xs
(x −xs)P(x, N|x0, 0) dx.
(13.33)
In order to use Eq. (13.33) concretely, one needs to specify a model for price increments.
The Black-Scholes model
We ﬁrst recover the classical model of Black and Scholes, by assuming that the relative
returns ηk = δxk/xk are iid random variables with a constant volatility σk = σ1. If one knows
(from empirical observation) the distribution P1(ηk) of returns over the elementary time
scale τ, one can easily reconstruct (using the independence of the returns) the distribution
P(x, N|x0, 0) needed to compute C. After changing variables to x →x0(1 + ρ)Ney, the
formula, Eq. (13.33), is transformed into:
C = x0
 ∞
ys
(ey −eys)PN(y) dy,
(13.34)
where ys ≡log(xs/x0[1 + ρ]N) and PN(y) ≡P(y, N|0, 0). Note that ys involves the ratio
ofthestrikepricetotheforwardpriceoftheunderlyingasset, x0[1 + ρ]N –seethediscussion
in Section 17.1.

240
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
Setting xk = x0(1 + ρ)keyk, the evolution of the yk’s is given by:
yk+1 −yk ≃
ηk
1 + ρ −η2
k
2
y0 = 0,
(13.35)
where third-order terms (η3, η2ρ, . . .) have been neglected. The distribution of the quantity
yN = N−1
k=0 [(ηk/(1 + ρ)) −(η2
k/2)] is then obtained, in Fourier space, as:
ˆP N(z) = [ ˜P1(z)]N,
(13.36)
where we have deﬁned, in the right-hand side, a modiﬁed Fourier transform:
˜P1(z) =

P1(η) exp

iz

η
1 + ρ −η2
2

dη.
(13.37)
The Black and Scholes limit
We can now examine the Black–Scholes limit, where P1(η) is a Gaussian of zero mean and
RMS equal to σ1 = σ√τ. Using the above Eqs. (13.36) and (13.37) one ﬁnds, for N large:†
PN(y) =
1

2π Nσ 2
1
exp

−

y + Nσ 2
1 /2
2
2Nσ 2
1

.
(13.38)
The Black–Scholes model also corresponds to the limit where the elementary time interval
τ goes to zero, in which case one has N = T/τ →∞. This limit is of course not realistic
since any transaction takes at least a few seconds and, more signiﬁcantly, that some correla-
tions are seen to persist over at least several minutes. Notwithstanding, if one takes the math-
ematical limit where τ →0, with N = T/τ →∞but keeping the product Nσ 2
1 = T σ 2
ﬁnite, one constructs the continuous-time log-normal process, or ‘geometrical Brownian
motion’. In this limit, using the above form for PN(y) and (1 + ρ)N →erT , one obtains the
celebrated Black–Scholes formula:
CBS(x0, xs, T ) = x0
 ∞
ys
(ey −eys)
√
2πσ 2T
exp

−(y + σ 2T/2)2
2σ 2T

dy
= x0PG>
 y−
σ
√
T

−xse−rT PG>
 y+
σ
√
T

,
(13.39)
where ys = log(xs/x0) −rT , y± = log(xs/x0) −rT ± σ 2T/2 and PG>(u) is the cumula-
tive normal distribution deﬁned by Eq. (2.36). The way CBS varies with the four parameters
x0, xs, T and σ is quite intuitive, and discussed at length in all the books which deal with
options. The derivatives of the price with respect to these parameters are now called the
† In fact, the variance of PN(y) is equal to Nσ 2
1 /(1 + ρ)2, but we neglect this small correction which disappears
in the limit τ →0.

13.3 Options: deﬁnition and valuation
241
Greeks, because they are denoted by Greek letters (see Section 16.1.6 below). For example,
the larger the price of the stock x0, the more probable it is to reach the strike price at expiry,
and the more expensive the option. Hence the so-called ‘Delta’ of the option ( = ∂C/∂x0)
is positive. As we shall show below, this quantity is actually directly related to the optimal
hedging strategy. The variation of the hedging strategy  with the price of the underlying is
noted  (Gamma) and is deﬁned as:  = ∂/∂x0. Similarly, the dependence in maturity
T and volatility σ (which in fact only appear through the combination σ
√
T if rT is very
small) leads to the deﬁnition of two further ‘Greeks’: Theta  = −∂C/∂T = ∂C/∂t < 0
and ‘Vega’ V = ∂C/∂σ > 0. In this limit, V = −2T/σ. The signs reﬂect the fact that if
the call premium is an increasing function of the volatility on the scale of the maturity of
the option, σ
√
T .
Bachelier’s Gaussian limit
Suppose now that the price process is additive rather than multiplicative. This means that
the increments δxk themselves, rather than the relative increments, should be considered as
independent random variables. (In other words, we consider as case where σkxk in Eq. (13.3)
is a constant.) Using the change of variable xk = (1 + ρ)k ˜xk in Eq. (13.31), one ﬁnds that
xN can be written as:
xN = x0(1 + ρ)N +
N−1

k=0
δxk(1 + ρ)N−k−1.
(13.40)
When N islarge,thedifference xN −x0(1 + ρ)N becomes,accordingtotheCLT,aGaussian
variable of mean zero (if the ϵk have zero mean) and of variance equal to:
c2(T ) = Dτ
N−1

ℓ=0
(1 + ρ)2ℓ≃DT [1 + ρ(N −1) + O(ρ2N 2)]
(13.41)
where Dτ is the variance of the individual increments, related to the volatility through:
D ≡σ 2x2
0. The price, Eq. (13.33), then takes the following form:
CG(x0, xs, T ) = e−rT
 ∞
xs
x −xs
√2πc2(T ) exp

−(x −x0erT )2
2c2(T )

dx.
(13.42)
The price formula written down by Bachelier corresponds to the limit of short maturity
options, where all interest rate effects can be neglected. In this limit, the above equation
simpliﬁes to:
CG(x0, xs, T ) ≃
 ∞
xs
x −xs
√
2π DT
exp

−(x −x0)2
2DT

dx.
(13.43)
This equation can also be derived directly from the Black–Scholes price, Eq. (13.39), in the
small maturity limit, where relative price variations are small: xN/x0 −1 ≪1, allowing
one to write y = log(x/x0) ≃(x −x0)/x0. As emphasized in Section 1.7, this is the limit
where the Gaussian and log-normal distributions become very similar.

242
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
80
90
100
110
120
xs
0
5
10
15
20
25
CG
CG
x0-xs
80
90
100
110
120
xs
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
(CG-CBS)/CG
Fig. 13.2. Price of a call of maturity T = 100 days as a function of the strike price xs, in the
Bachelier model. The underlying stock is worth 100, and the daily volatility is 1%. The interest rate
is taken to be zero. Inset: relative difference between the the log-normal, Black–Scholes price CBS
and the Gaussian, Bachelier price (CG), for the same values of the parameters.
The dependence of CG(x0, xs, T ) as a function of xs is shown in Figure 13.2, where the
numerical value of the relative difference between the Black–Scholes and Bachelier price
is also plotted.
In a more general additive model, when N is ﬁnite, one can reconstruct the full distribution
P(x, N|x0, 0) from the elementary distribution P1(δx) using the convolution rule (slightly
modiﬁed to take into account the extra factors (1 + ρ)N−k−1 in Eq. (13.40)). When N
is large, the Gaussian approximation P(x, N|x0, 0) = PG(x, N|x0(1 + ρ)N, 0) becomes
accurate, according to the CLT discussed in Chapter 2.
As far as interest rate effects are concerned, it is interesting to note that both formulae,
Eqs. (13.39) and (13.42), can be written as e−rT times a function of x0erT , that is of the
forward price F0. This is quite natural, since an option on a stock and on a forward must
have the same price, since they have the same pay-off at expiry. As will be discussed in
Section 17.1, this is a rather general property, not related to any particular model for price
ﬂuctuations.
13.3.4 Real option prices, volatility smile and ‘implied’ kurtosis
Stationary distributions and the smile curve
We shall now come back to the case where the distribution of the price increments δxk is
arbitrary, for example a truncated Levy distribution, or a Student distribution. For simplicity,
we set the interest rate ρ to zero (a non-zero interest rate can readily be taken into account

13.3 Options: deﬁnition and valuation
243
-10
-5
0
5
10
xs-x0
10
15
20
25
30
Σ(xs,T)
Fig. 13.3. ‘Implied volatility’  as used by the market to account for non-Gaussian effects. The
larger the difference between xs and x0, the larger the value of : the curve has the shape of a smile.
The function plotted here is a simple parabola, which is obtained theoretically by including the
effect of a non-zero kurtosis κ1, but a zero skewness, of the elementary price increments. Note that
for at-the-money options (xs = x0), the implied volatility is smaller than the true volatility.
by discounting the price of the call on the forward contract), and assume that the maturity
is such that an additive model for price changes is suitable. The price difference is then
the sum of N = T/τ iid random variables, to which the discussion of the CLT presented
in Chapter 2 applies directly. For large N, the terminal price distribution P(x, N|x0, 0)
becomes Gaussian, while for N ﬁnite, ‘fat tail’ effects are important and the deviations
from the CLT are noticeable. In particular, short maturity options or out-of-the-money
options, or options on very ‘jagged’ assets, are not adequately priced by the Black–Scholes
formula.
In practice, the market corrects for this difference empirically, by introducing in the
Black–Scholes formula an ad hoc ‘implied’ volatility , different from the ‘true’, historical
volatility of the underlying asset. Furthermore, the value of the implied volatility needed
to price options of different strike prices xs and/or maturities T properly is not constant,
but rather depends both on T and xs. This deﬁnes a ‘volatility surface’ (xs, T ). It is
usually observed that the larger the difference between xs and x0, the larger the implied
volatility: this is the so-called ‘smile effect’ (Fig. 13.3). On the other hand, the longer the
maturity T , the better the Gaussian approximation; the smile thus tends to ﬂatten out with
maturity.
It is important to understand how traders on option markets use the Black–Scholes for-
mula. Rather than viewing it as a predictive theory for option prices given an observed
(historical) volatility, the Black–Scholes formula allows the trader to translate back and
forth between market prices (driven by supply and demand) and an abstract parameter
called the implied volatility. In itself this transformation (between prices and volatilities)
does not add any new information. However, this approach is useful in practice, since the
implied volatility varies much less than option prices themselves as a function of maturity
and moneyness. The Black–Scholes formula is thus viewed as a zero-th order approxima-
tion that takes into account the gross features of option prices, the traders then correcting for

244
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
other effects by adjusting the implied volatility. This view is quite common in experimental
sciences where an a priori constant parameter of an approximate theory is made into a
varying effective parameter to describe more subtle effects.
However, the use of the Black–Scholes formula (which assumes a constant volatility)
with an ad hoc variable volatility is not very satisfactory from a theoretical point of view.
Furthermore, this practice requires the manipulation of a whole volatility surface (xs, T ),
which can deform in time – this is not particularly convenient.
A simple cumulant expansion allows one to understand the origin and the shape of the
volatility smile.† Let us assume that the maturity T = Nτ is sufﬁciently large so that only
the skewness and kurtosis of P1(δx) must be taken into account to measure the difference
with a Gaussian distribution. As shown below, the formula Eq. (13.34) reads, when the
skewness is zero:
Cκ(x0, xs, T ) = κ1τ
24T

DT
2π exp

−(xs −x0)2
2DT
 (xs −x0)2
DT
−1

,
(13.44)
where D ≡σ 2x2
0 and Cκ = Cκ −Cκ=0.
One can indeed transform the formula
C =
 ∞
xs
(x′ −xs)P(x′, T |x0, 0) dx′,
(13.45)
through an integration by parts
C =
 ∞
xs
P>(x′, T |x0, 0) dx′.
(13.46)
After changing variables x′ →x′ −x0, and using Eq. (2.37) of Section 2.3.3, one gets:
C = CG +
√
DT
√
N
 ∞
us
1
√
2π
Q1(u)e−u2/2 du
+
√
DT
N
 ∞
us
1
√
2π
Q2(u)e−u2/2 du + · · ·
(13.47)
where us ≡(xs −x0)/
√
DT . Now, noticing that:
Q1(u)e−u2/2 = λ3
6
d2
du2 e−u2/2,
(13.48)
and
Q2(u)e−u2/2 = −λ4
24
d3
du3 e−u2/2 −λ2
3
72
d5
du5 e−u2/2,
(13.49)
† The idea of a cumulant expansion for option prices was pioneered by Jarrow & Rudd (1982). The present results
have been obtained in Potters et al. (1997) in the context of an additive model, and very similar results for the
multiplicative model can be found in Backus et al. (1997). More recently, similar results have also been recovered
in a very different language in Fouque et al. (2000), in the framework of a stochastic volatility model with short
range correlations. As discussed in Section 7.1.4, a stochastic volatility gives rise to a non zero kurtosis decaying
as 1/N, which is indeed the small expansion parameter of Fouque et al. (2001).

13.3 Options: deﬁnition and valuation
245
the integrations over u are readily performed, yielding:
C = CG +
√
DT e−u2s /2
√
2π

−λ3
6
√
N
us +
λ4
24N

u2
s −1

+
λ2
3
72N

u4
s −6u2
s + 3

+ · · ·

,
(13.50)
which indeed coincides with Eq. (13.44) for λ3 = 0. In the practical case λ2
3 ≪λ4, and
we will neglect the last term in this equation.
Notethatwereferheretoadditive(ratherthanmultiplicative)priceincrements:theBlack–
Scholes volatility smile is often asymmetrical merely because of the use of a skewed log-
normal distribution to describe a nearly symmetrical process (see the extensive discussion
in Chapter 8).
On the other hand, a simple calculation shows that the variation of Cκ=0(x0, xs, T ) (as
given by Eq. (13.43)) when the volatility changes by a small quantity δD = 2σ x2
0δσ is
given by:
δCκ=0(x0, xs, T ) = δσ x0

T
2π exp

−(xs −x0)2
2DT

.
(13.51)
The effect of a non-zero skewness and kurtosis can thus be reproduced (to ﬁrst or-
der) by a Gaussian pricing formula, but at the expense of using an effective volatility
(xs, T ) = σ + δσ given by:
(xs, T ) = σ

1 −ς(T )
6
M + κ(T )
24 (M2 −1)

,
(13.52)
where M = (xs −x0)/
√
DT is the rescaled moneyness, ς(T ) and κ(T ) are the skewness
and kurtosis of the price increments on the scale of the maturity of the option.† This very
simple formula, plotted in Figure 13.3, allows one to understand intuitively the shape and
amplitude of the smile. For example, for κ(T ) = 1 (typical of one month options), the
kurtosis correction to the volatility is on the order of δσ/σ ≈33% for strongly out-of-the-
money options such that M = 3. Note that the effect of the kurtosis is to reduce the implied
at-the-money volatility in comparison with its true value. The effect of the skewness is to
make the smile asymmetric around the strike price xs: for a negative skewness, the smile
remains a parabola, but centered around a shifted strike price xs →xs −2ς(T )σ
√
T /κ(T ).
When the skew is negative and large, the smile looks very much, around the money, like a
straight line of negative slope. This shape is indeed observed for option on stock indices,
for which the historical skew is indeed large (see Chapter 8).
† A similar formula, obtained in the context of the multiplicative (log-normal) Brownian motion was obtained in
Backus et al. (1997), in the limit where the volatility σ is small. In this limit, one indeed expect the multiplicative
and additive models to coincide.

246
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
0
100
200
300
400
500
Theoretical price
0
100
200
300
400
500
Market price
Fig. 13.4. Comparison between theoretical and observed option prices. Each point corresponds to an
option on the Bund (traded on the LIFFE in London), with different strike prices and maturities. The
x coordinate of each point is the theoretical price of the option (determined using the empirical
terminal price distribution), while the y coordinate is the market price of the option. If the theory is
good, one should observe a cloud of points concentrated around the line y = x. The line
corresponds to a linear regression, and gives y = 0.998x + 0.02 (in basis points units).
Figure 13.4 shows some ‘experimental’ data, concerning options on the Bund (futures)
contract – for which a weakly non-Gaussian model is satisfactory. The associated option
market is, furthermore, very liquid; this tends to reduce the width of the bid-ask spread, and
thus, probably to decrease the difference between the market price and a theoretical ‘fair’
price. This is not the case for OTC options, when the overhead charged by the ﬁnancial
institution writing the option can in some case be very large, cf. Section 14.1 below. In
Figure 13.4, each point corresponds to an option of a certain maturity and strike price. The
coordinates of these points are the theoretical price, Eq. (13.34), along the x axis (calculated
using the historical distribution of the Bund), and the observed market price along the y
axis. If the theory is good, one should observe a cloud of points concentrated around the
line y = x. Figure 13.4 includes points from the ﬁrst half of 1995, which was rather ‘calm’,
in the sense that the volatility remained roughly constant during that period (see Fig. 13.5).
Correspondingly, the assumption that the process is stationary is reasonable.
The agreement between theoretical and observed prices is however much less convincing
if one uses data from 1994, when the volatility of interest rate markets has been high. The
following subsection aims at describing these discrepancies in greater detail.
Non-stationarity and ‘implied’ kurtosis
As discussed in details in Chapter 7, a more precise analysis reveals that the scale of the
ﬂuctuations of the underlying asset (here the Bund contract) itself varies noticeably around

13.3 Options: deﬁnition and valuation
247
93
94
95
96
t
0
1
2
3
4
σ(t)  (arb. units)
fluctuations of the underlying
options prices
Fig. 13.5. Time dependence of the volatility σ, obtained from the analysis of the high frequency
(intra-day) ﬂuctuations of the underlying asset (here the Bund), or from the implied volatility of
at-the-money options. More precisely, the historical determination of σ comes from the daily
average of the absolute value of the 5-min price increments. The two curves are then smoothed over
5 days. These two determinations are strongly correlated, showing that the option price mostly
reﬂects the instantaneous volatility of the underlying asset itself.
its mean value; these ‘scale ﬂuctuations’ are furthermore correlated with the option prices.
More precisely, one postulates that the distribution of price increments δx has a constant
shape, but a width σk which is time dependent (cf. Chapter 7 and Eq. (13.3)).
Figure 13.5 shows the evolution of the volatility σ (ﬁltered over 5 days in the past) as a
function of time and compares it to the implied volatility (xs = x0) extracted from at-the-
money options during the same period. One thus observes that the option prices are rather
well tracked by adjusting the factor σk through a short-term estimate of the volatility of the
underlying asset. This means that the option prices primarily reﬂects the short term average
volatility of the underlying asset itself, rather than an ‘anticipated’ average volatility on the
life time of the option. More precisely, the short term average volatility is found empirically
to be on average a better predictor of future realized volatilities than the implied volatility.
Of course, in some market conditions, the volatility is expected to rise or fall because of –
say – political events, an effect that cannot be captured by the analysis of the past time
series.
It is interesting to notice that the mere existence of volatility ﬂuctuations leads to a non-
zero kurtosis κN of the asset ﬂuctuations (see Section 7.1). This kurtosis has an anomalous
time dependence (cf. Eq. (7.15)), in agreement with the direct observation of the volatility
ﬂuctuations. On the other hand, an ‘implied kurtosis’ can be extracted from the market price
of options, using Eq. (13.52) as a ﬁt to the empirical smile, see Figure 13.6. Remarkably

248
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
-4.0
-2.0
0.0
2.0
4.0
xs-x0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
Σ(xs,T )
Fig. 13.6. Implied Black–Scholes volatility and ﬁtted parabolic smile. The circles correspond to all
quoted prices on 26th April, 1995, on options of 1-month maturity. The error bars correspond to an
error on the price of ±1 basis point. The curvature of the parabola allows one to extract the implied
kurtosis κ(T ) using Eq. (13.52).
enough, this implied kurtosis is in close correspondence with the historical kurtosis – note
that Figure 13.7 does not require any further adjustable parameter.
As a conclusion of this section, it seems that market operators have empirically
corrected the Black–Scholes formula to account for two distinct, but related effects:
r The presence of market jumps, implying fat tailed distributions (κ > 0) of short-term
price increments. This effect is responsible for the volatility smile (and also, as we
shall discuss next, for the fact that options are risky).
r The fact that the volatility is not constant, but ﬂuctuates in time, leading to an
anomalously slow decay of the kurtosis (slower than 1/N) and, correspondingly,
to a non-trivial deformation of the smile with maturity.
It is interesting to note that, through trial and errors, the market as a whole has evolved to
allow for such non-trivial statistical features – at least on most actively traded markets. This
might be called ‘market efﬁciency’; but contrarily to stock markets where it is difﬁcult to
judge whether the stock price is or is not the ‘true’ price (which might be an empty concept),
option markets offer a remarkable testing ground for this idea (the fact that options have a
ﬁnite life time allows one to judge ex post if their price is fair on average). Option markets

13.3 Options: deﬁnition and valuation
249
10
30
100
300
N
0.1
1
10
κN
Historical κT (future)
Implied κimp (option)
Fit Eq. (7.15), exp. g(l) 
Fit Eq. (7.15), power-law g(l)
Fig. 13.7. Plot (in log–log coordinates) of the average implied kurtosis κimp (determined by ﬁtting
the implied volatility for a ﬁxed maturity by a parabola) and of the empirical kurtosis κN (determined
directly from the historical movements of the Bund contract), as a function of the reduced time scale
N = T/τ, τ = 30 min. All transactions of options on the Bund future from 1993 to 1995 were
analysed along with 5 minute tick data of the Bund future for the same period. We show for
comparison a ﬁt with κN ≈N −0.42 (dark line), as suggested by the results of Section 7.1.4. A ﬁt with
an exponentially decaying volatility correlation function is however also acceptable (dashed line).
offers a nice example of adaptation of a population (the option traders) to a complex and
hostile environment, which has taken place in only a few decades!
13.3.5 The case of an inﬁnite kurtosis
Since there is some evidence that the kurtosis might not always be ﬁnite for ﬁnancial time
series, the above cumulant expansion might be problematic. It is interesting to consider
a particular case where the kurtosis of the terminal distribution is inﬁnite and where an
explicit formula for the price of options can be written down. It turns out that when the
distribution of price changes obeys a Student distribution with µ = 3 (i.e. with the value of
the tail exponent in agreement with recent studies, see Chapter 6), a very simple formula
for option prices can be obtained.
Suppose that the price change x = xT −x0 between now t = 0 and maturity t = T is
distributed according to:
P(x) = 2
π
(DT )3/2
(DT + x2)2 ,
(13.53)
where DT is the variance of the price difference on the time scale T .

250
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
The price of a European option, for zero interest rates, is given by:
C(x0, xs, T ) =
 ∞
xs
(x −xs)P(x −x0) dx.
(13.54)
It turns out that the above integral can be computed exactly and leads to a rather simple result
(see Eq. 1.40). Introducing the rescaled moneyness of the option M = (xs −x0)/
√
DT ,
the option price reads:
C(x0, xs, T ) =
√
DT
2π
(2 −πM + 2M arctan M) .
(13.55)
At the money (M = 0), the price of the option is equal to
√
DT /π, which is smaller than
the Gaussian price √DT/2π. The ‘implied volatility’ is therefore reduced, compared to
the true volatility, by a factor √2/π = 0.798. This reduction of the at-the-money volatility
was already noted above in the context of a cumulant expansion.
For deep out-of-the-money calls, the above formula can be expanded as:
C(x0, xs, T ) ≃
√
DT
3πM2 + . . . ;
(13.56)
where the slow M−2 decay reﬂects that of the Student distribution above. Finally, for deep
in-the-money calls, one ﬁnds:
C(x0, xs, T ) ≃(x0 −xs) +
√
DT
π
+
(13.57)
Another way to present the results is to draw the implied volatility (M) such that a
Gaussian formula with such an implied volatility exactly reproduces Eq. (13.55) above. The
shape of the smile in this case is shown in Fig. (13.8). Note that for large moneyness, the
smile becomes approximately linear.
-4
-2
0
2
4
Rescaled moneyness
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Σ/σ
Fig. 13.8. Shape of the smile for an inﬁnite kurtosis case, here a Student distribution with µ = 3.

13.4 Summary
251
An explicit formula for the price of the option can actually be obtained for all integer
values of µ (see e.g. Eq. (1.41)).
13.4 Summary
r The problem of derivative pricing and hedging consist in controlling and ‘chiseling’
the distribution of proﬁts and losses associated to the writing of a contract. Both
the average value and the shape of this distribution are affected by the price of the
contract and the hedging strategy. The variance of this distribution can be taken as a
simple indicator of risk, although other indicators, based on tail events, can also be
considered.
r The fair price of a contract is such that the average proﬁt, including the cost of the
hedging strategy, is zero. When the risk can be made zero, the fair price is such
that there are no arbitrage opportunities. When the risk is non zero, the price of the
contract may reﬂect a risk premium, which can be large in an asymmetric market
where buyers and sellers of the contract have different perceptions of risk.
r In the case of futures contract, a perfect hedging strategy exists. This uniquely ﬁxes
the price of futures as x0erT, when x0 is the current price of the underlying and T the
maturity.
r In the case of options, the fair-price is, when the mean return of the underlying is equal
to the risk free rate, the average of the ﬁnal pay-off of the option over the distribution
of price histories. For a Gaussian process, one ﬁnds the Bachelier formula (for the
additive case) and the Black-Scholes formula (for the multiplicative case). In the case
of non-Gaussian markets, corrections to these formula appear. These can be encoded
in a modiﬁed (‘implied’) value of the volatility used in the Black-Scholes formula,
which becomes both strike and maturity dependent.
r Part of the information contained in this implied volatility surface used by market
participants can be explained by an adequate statistical model of the underlying asset
ﬂuctuations. In particular, in weakly non-Gaussian markets, important parameters
are the time-dependent skewness and kurtosis, see Eq. (13.52), that give respectively
the skewness and curvature of the smile. The anomalous maturity dependence of the
kurtosis encodes the fact that the volatility itself has long range correlations.
r Further reading
L. Bachelier, Th´eorie de la Sp´eculation, Gabay, Paris, 1995.
M. Baxter, A. Rennie, Financial Calculus, An Introduction to Derivative Pricing, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1996.
J. P. Fouque, G. Papanicolaou, R. Sircar, Derivatives in Financial Markets with Stochastic Volatility,
Cambridge University Press, 2000.
J. C. Hull, Futures, Options and Other Derivatives, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1997.
M. Musiela, M. Rutkowski, Martingale Methods in Financial Modelling, Springer, New York, 1997.

252
Futures and options: fundamental concepts
D. Lamberton, B. Lapeyre, Introduction au calcul stochastique appliqu´e `a la ﬁnance, Ellipses, Paris,
1991.
M. Musiela, M. Rutkowski, Martingale Methods in Financial Modelling, Springer, New York, 1997.
I. Nelken (ed.), The Handbook of Exotic Options, Irwin, Chicago, IL, 1996.
P. Wilmott, J. N. Dewynne, S. D. Howison, Option Pricing: Mathematical Models and Computation,
Oxford Financial Press, Oxford, 1993.
P. Wilmott, Derivatives, The theory and practice of ﬁnancial engineering, John Wiley, 1998.
P. Wilmott, Paul Wilmott Introduces Quantitative Finance, John Wiley, 2001.
r Specialized papers: some classics
F. Black, M. Scholes, The pricing of options and corporate liabilities, Journal of Political Economy,
3, 637 (1973).
J. C. Cox, S. A. Ross, M. Rubinstein, Option pricing: a simpliﬁed approach, Journal of Financial
Economics, 7, 229 (1979).
R. C. Merton, Theory of rational option pricing, Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science,
4, 141 (1973).
r Specialized papers: alternative models
L. Borland, Option pricing formulas based on a non-Gaussian stock price model, Physical Review
Letters, 89, 09870 (2002); Quantitative Finance, 2, 415 (2002).
P. Carr, H. Geman, D. Madan, M. Yor, The ﬁne structure of asset returns: an empirical investigation,
forthcoming, Journal of Business (2000).
E. Derman, I. Kani,Stochasticimpliedtrees:arbitrage pricing with stochastic term and strike structure
of volatility, Int. Jour. Theo. Appl. Fin., 1, 61 (1998).
E. Eberlein, U. Keller, Option pricing with hyperbolic distributions, Bernoulli, 1, 281 (1995).
J.-P. Fouque, G. Papanicolaou, K. R. Sircar, Mean-reverting stochastic volatility, Int. Jour. Theo.
Appl. Fin., 3, 101 (2000).
S. L. Heston, A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility with applications to bond
and currency options, Review of Financial Studies, 6, 327 (1993).
J. K. Hoogland, C. D. D. Newmann, Local scale invariance and contingent claim pricing I, Int. Jour.
Theo. Appl. Fin., 4, 1 (2001).
J. K. Hoogland, C. D. D. Newmann, Local scale invariance and contingent claim pricing II, Int. Jour.
Theo. Appl. Fin., 4, 23 (2001).
J. C. Hull, A. White, The pricing of options on assets with stochastic volatility, Journal of Finance,
XLII, 281 (1987).
J. C. Hull, A. White, An analysis of the bias in option pricing caused by stochastic volatility, Advances
in Futures and Option Research, 3, 29 (1988).
R. W. Lee, Implied and local volatilities under stochastic volatility, Int. Jour. Theo. Appl. Fin., 4, 45
(2001).
A. Matacz, Financial Modelling and Option Theory with the Truncated Levy Process, Int. Jour. Theo.
Appl. Fin., 3, 703 (2000).
r Specialized papers: cumulant expansion and smiles
D. Backus, S. Foresi, K. Lai, L. Wu, Accounting for biases in Black-Scholes, Working paper of NYU
Stern School of Business, 1997.
C. J. Corrado, T. Su, Skewness and kurtosis in S&P500 index returns implied by option prices, Journal
of Financial Research, XIX, 175 (1996).

13.4 Summary
253
R. Cont, J. da Fonseca, Dynamics of implied volatility surfaces, Quantitative Finance, 2, 45 (2002),
and references therein.
J. C. Jackwerth, M. Rubinstein, Recovering probability distributions from option prices, Journal of
Finance, 51, 1611.
R. Jarrow, A. Rudd, Approximate option valuation for arbitrary stochastic processes, Journal of
Financial Economics, 10, 347 (1982).
B. Pochart, J.-P. Bouchaud, The skewed multifractal random walk with applications to option smiles,
Quantitative Finance, 2, 303 (2002).
M. Potters, R. Cont, J.-P. Bouchaud, Financial markets as adaptative ecosystems, Europhysics Letters,
41, 239 (1998).
