20
Simple mechanisms for anomalous price statistics
In the future, all models will be right, but each one only for 15 minutes.
(E. Derman, after Andy Warhol, Quantitative Finance (2001).)
20.1 Introduction
Physicists like using power-laws to ﬁt data. The reason for this is that complex, collective
phenomenon often give rise to power-laws which are furthermore universal, that is to a
large degree independent of the microscopic details of the phenomenon. These power-
laws emerge from collective action and transcend individual speciﬁcities. As such, they
are unforgeable signatures of a collective mechanism. Examples in the physics literature
are numerous. A well-known example is that of phase transitions, where a system evolves
from a disordered state to an ordered state: many observables behave as universal power
laws in the vicinity of the transition point (see e.g. Goldenfeld (1992)). This is related to
an important property of power-laws, namely ‘scale invariance’: the characteristic length
scale of a physical system at its critical point is inﬁnite, leading to self-similar, scale-free
ﬂuctuations. Similarly, power-law distributions are scale invariant in the sense that the
relative probability to observe an event of a given size s0 and an event ten times larger
is independent of the reference scale s0. Another interesting example is ﬂuid turbulence,
where the statistics of the velocity ﬁeld has scale invariant properties, to a large extent
independent of the geometry, the nature of the ﬂuid, of the power injected, etc. (see Frisch
(1997)).
As reviewed in Chapters 6, 7, power-laws are also often observed in economic and
ﬁnancial data. For example, the tail of the distribution of high frequency stock returns is
found to be well ﬁtted by a power-law with an exponent µ ≈3. The temporal decay of
volatility correlations is also found to be described by a slow power law. Compared to
physics, however, much less efforts have yet been devoted to understanding these power-
laws in terms of ‘microscopic’ (i.e. agent based) models and to relating the value of the
exponents to some generic mechanisms. The aim of this chapter is to discuss several simple
models which naturally lead to power-laws and could serve as a starting point for further
developments. It should be stressed that none of the models presented here are intended
to be fully realistic and complete, but are of pedagogical interest: they nicely illustrate
how and when power-laws can arise. The role of models is not necessarily to provide an

356
Simple mechanisms for anomalous price statistics
exact description of reality. Their primary goal is to set a framework within which relevant
questions, that are of wider scope than the model itself, can be formulated and answered.
20.2 Simple models for herding and mimicry
We ﬁrst describe some very simple models for thick tails in the distribution of price incre-
ments in ﬁnancial markets. An intuitive explanation is herding: if a large number of agents
acting on markets coordinate their action, the price change is likely to be huge due to a
large unbalance between buy and sell orders. However, this coordination can result from
two rather different mechanisms.
r One is the feedback of past price changes onto themselves, which we will discuss in the
following section. Since all agents are inﬂuenced by the very same price changes, this can
induce non trivial collective behaviour: for example, an accidental price drop can trigger
large sell orders, which lead to further downward moves.
r The second is direct inﬂuence between the traders, through exchange of information that
leads to ‘clusters’ of agents sharing the same decision to buy, sell, or be inactive at any
given instant of time.
20.2.1 Herding and percolation
A simple model of how herding affects the price ﬂuctuations is based on the following
ingredients. First, assume that the price increment δx depends linearly on the instantaneous
offset between supply and demand. More precisely, if each operator in the market i wants
to buy or sell a certain ﬁxed quantity of the ﬁnancial asset, one has:†
δx = 1
λ

i
ϕi ≡
λ ,
(20.1)
where ϕi can take the values −1, 0 or + 1, depending on whether the operator i is selling,
inactive, or buying, and λ is a measure of the market depth. Recent empirical analysis seems
to conﬁrm that the relation between price changes δx and order imbalance 
i ϕi, averaged
over a time scale of several minutes, is indeed linear for small arguments, but bends down
and perhaps even saturates for larger arguments.‡
Suppose now that the operators interact with one another in an heterogeneous manner:
with a small probability p/N (where N is the total number of operators on the market), two
operators i and j are ‘connected’, and with probability 1 −p/N, they ignore each other.
The factor 1/N means that on average, the number of operator connected to any particular
† This can alternatively be written for the relative price increment η = δx/x, which is more adapted to describe
long time scales. On short time scales, however, an additive model is preferable. See the discussion in Chapter 8.
‡ On this point, and on the possible relation with the value µ ≈3, see the recent paper by Gabaix et al. (2002).

20.2 Simple models for herding and mimicry
357
one is equal to p. Suppose ﬁnally that if two operators are connected, they will come to
agree on the strategy they should follow, i.e. ϕi = ϕ j.
It is easy to understand that the population of operators clusters into groups sharing the
same opinion. These clusters are deﬁned such that there exists a connection between any
two operators belonging to this cluster, although the connection can be indirect and follow
a certain ‘path’ between operators. These clusters do not all have the same size, i.e. do not
contain the same number of operators. If the size of cluster C is called S(C), one can write:
δx = 1
λ

C
S(C)ϕ(C),
(20.2)
where ϕ(C) is the common opinion of all operators belonging to C. The statistics of the price
increments δx therefore reduces to the statistics of the size of clusters, a classical problem
in percolation theory (Stauffer & Aharony (1994)). One ﬁnds that as long as p < 1 (less
than one ‘neighbour’ on average with whom one can exchange information), then all S(C)’s
are small compared to the total number of traders N. More precisely, the distribution of
cluster sizes takes the following form in the limit where 1 −p = ϵ ≪1:
P(S) ∝S≫1
1
S5/2 exp −ϵ2S
S ≪N.
(20.3)
When p = 1 (percolation threshold), the distribution becomes a pure power-law with an
exponent µ = 3/2, and the Central Limit Theorem tells us that in this case, the distribution of
the price increments δx is precisely a pure symmetrical L´evy distribution of index µ = 3/2
(assuming that ϕ = ± 1 play identical roles, that is if there is no global bias pushing the price
up or down). If p < 1, on the other hand, one ﬁnds that the L´evy distribution is truncated
exponentially, leading to a larger effective tail exponent µ. If p > 1, a ﬁnite fraction of the
N traders have the same opinion: this leads to a crash. Very recently, a somewhat related
model, where each agent probes the opinion of a pool of m randomly selected agents, was
introduced by Eckmann et al. (2002). The agent then chooses either to conform to the
majority opinion or to be contrarian if the majority is too strong. This interesting model
leads to various types of market behaviour, from periodic to chaotic.
20.2.2 Avalanches of opinion changes
The above simple percolation model is interesting but has one major drawback: one has
to assume that the parameter p is smaller than one, but relatively close to one such that
Eq. (20.3) is valid, and non trivial statistics follows. One should thus explain why the value
of p spontaneously stabilizes in the neighbourhood of the critical value p = 1. Furthermore,
this model is purely static, and does not specify how the above clusters evolve with time.
As such, it cannot address the problem of volatility clustering. Several extensions of this
simple model have been proposed, in particular to increase the value of µ from µ = 3/2 to
µ ∼3 and to account for volatility clustering.
One particularly interesting model is inspired by the recent work of Dahmen & Sethna
(1996), that describes the behaviour of random magnets in a time dependent magnetic ﬁeld.

358
Simple mechanisms for anomalous price statistics
Transposed to market dynamics, this model describes the collective behaviour of a set of
traders exchanging information, but having all different a priori opinions, say optimistic
(buy) or pessimistic (sell). One trader can however change his mind and take the opinion
of his neighbours if the herding tendency is strong, or if the strength of his a priori opinion
is weak. More precisely, the opinion ϕi(t) of agent i at time t is determined as:
ϕi(t) = sign

hi(t) +
N

j=1
Ji jϕ j(t)

,
(20.4)
where Ji j is a connectivity matrix describing how strongly agent j inﬂuences agent i (in the
above percolation model, Ji j was either 0 or J), and hi(t) describes the a priori opinion of
agent i: hi > 0 means a propensity to buy, hi < 0 a propensity to sell. We assume that hi is a
random variable with a time dependent mean h(t) and root mean square . The quantity h(t)
is the average optimism, for example conﬁdence in long term economy growth (h(t) > 0),
or fear of recession (h(t) < 0). Suppose that one starts at t = 0 from a ‘euphoric’ state,
where h ≫, J, such that ϕi = 1 for all i’s. Here J denotes the order of magnitude of

j Ji j. Now, conﬁdence is smoothly decreased. Will sell orders appear progressively, or
will there be a sudden panic where a large fraction of agents want to sell?
Interestingly, one ﬁnds that for small enough inﬂuence (or strong heterogeneities of
agents’ anticipations), i.e. for J ≪, the average opinion O(t) = 
i ϕi(t)/N evolves
continuously from O(t = 0) = +1 to O(t →∞) = −1 (see Figure 20.1). The situation
changes when imitation is stronger since a discontinuity then appears in O(t) around a
-400
-200
0
200
400
t
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
O(t)
J  < J c
J  > J c
Fig. 20.1. Schematic evolution of the average opinion as a function of external news in the
Dahmen-Sethna model. For small enough mutual inﬂuence, J < Jc, the shift from optimism to
pessimism is progressive, whereas for J > Jc, it occurs suddenly.

20.3 Models of feedback effects on price ﬂuctuations
359
‘crash’ time tc, when a ﬁnite fraction of the population simultaneously change opinion. The
gap O(t−
c ) −O(t+
c ) opens continuously as J crosses a critical value Jc(). For J close to
Jc, one ﬁnds that the sell orders again organize as avalanches of various sizes, distributed as
a power-law with an exponential cut-off. In the fully connected case where Ji j ≡J/N for
all i j, one ﬁnds an exponent µ = 5/4. Note that in this case, the value of the exponent µ is
to a large extent universal, and does not depend, for example, on the detailed shape of the
distribution of the hi’s, but only on some global properties of the connectivity matrix Ji j.
A slowly oscillating h(t) can therefore lead to a succession of bull and bear markets, with
a strongly non Gaussian, intermittent behaviour, since most of the activity is concentrated
around the crash times tc.
The above model is very interesting because it may describe several situations where there
is a conﬂict between personal opinions and social pressure. For example, the way mobile
phones invaded the French market is qualitatively similar to the plot shown in Fig. 20.1. In
this case, O(t) would be the number of persons without mobile phones.
20.3 Models of feedback effects on price ﬂuctuations
20.3.1 Risk-aversion induced crashes
Set up of the model
The above average ‘stimulus’ h(t) may also strongly depend on the past behaviour of the
price itself. For example, past positive trends are, for many investors, incentives to buy, and
vice-versa. Since the ‘true’ price of a stock is difﬁcult to estimate, investors are tempted
to extract from past price changes themselves some information that other agents might
possess. This is a rational decision if indeed some other agents have this information, but
is also the mechanism by which bubbles and excess volatilities are created.
Actually, for a given past trend amplitude, price drops tend to feedback more strongly
on the investors behaviour than price rises. We have discussed some indirect empirical
evidence for this in Chapter 8, when the leverage effect was discussed. Risk-aversion indeed
creates an asymmetry between positive and negative price changes. This is also reﬂected in
option markets, where the price of out-of-the-money puts (i.e. insurance against crashes) is
anomalously high.
Similarly, past periods of high volatility increase the risk of investing in stocks, and sim-
ple portfolio theories (such as discussed in Chapter 12) then suggest that sell orders should
follow. A simple mathematical transcription of these effects is to supplement Eq. (20.1)
with an dynamical equation for the excess demand t which encodes the above feedback
effects:
t+1 −t = m + a δxt −b δx2
t −a′ δxt −K (xt −x0) + χξt,
(20.5)
where:
r m is the average increase (or decrease) of the overall optimism h(t) between t and t + 1,
that tends to increase (decrease) the excess demand. We will set to m zero in the following.

360
Simple mechanisms for anomalous price statistics
r a > 0 describes trends following effects, that is how past price increments ampliﬁes the
average propensity to buy or sell.
r b > 0 describes risk aversion effects, and encodes the fact that price drops are given
more weight than price increases: the term −b δx2
t can be seen as giving to the parameter
a a dependence on δxt, such that a increases when the price goes down. Alternatively,
δx2
t can be seen as a proxy for the short term volatility; an increase of volatility should
decrease the demand for the stock. The most important point is that a term proportional
to δx2
t breaks the δxt →−δxt symmetry.
r a′ > 0 is a stabilizing term (which has an effect opposite to that of a) that arises from
market clearing mechanisms: the very fact that the price moves clears a certain number
of orders, and reduces the order imbalance. In fact, because the size of the queue in the
order book is on average an increasing function of the distance from the current price,
one expects non linear corrections to this market clearing argument, that will add terms
of higher order in δxt (see below).
r K > 0 is a mean-reverting force that models the fact that if the price xt is too far above a
reference fundamental price x0, sell orders will be generated, and vice-versa.
r Finally, ξ is a random variable noise term representing random external news that induces
more buy (or sell) orders. The coefﬁcient χ can be seen as the susceptibility to these
news. A more reﬁned version of the theory should allow this coefﬁcient itself to depend
on past values of δx: an increase of the volatility tends to make agents more nervous and
feeds back onto itself, leading to volatility clustering. A simple model of this type will be
explored in Section 20.3.2 below.
Before analyzing the properties of the model deﬁned by Eqs. (20.1, 20.5), one should add
the following remarks: (i) we consider here a model for absolute price changes, which is
suitable for short time scales. On longer time scales, the model should rather be expressed in
terms of log prices. This was discussed at length in Chapter 8; (ii) Eq. (20.5) can be thought
of as an expansion in powers of the price increment δxt. One therefore expects further terms,
in particular a term of the form −cδx3
t that plays a stabilizing role in some circumstances.
Eliminating t from the equations (20.1) and (20.5), and taking the continuous time
limit, one derives a ‘Langevin’ equation for the price ‘velocity’ u ≡dx/dt:
du
dt = −αu −βu2 −γ u3 −κ(x −x0) + ˜ξ(t)
(20.6)
where α = (a′ −a)/λ, β = b/λ, γ = c/λ κ = K/λ and ˜ξ(t) = χξ(t)/λ.
This simple equation encapsulates a number of interesting phenomena. In physical terms,
equation (20.6) represents the Langevin dynamics of the position u of a ﬁctitious particle
in a time dependent ‘potential’ (see Fig. 20.2):
V (u) = κ(x −x0)u + α u2
2 + β u3
3 + γ u4
4 + . . . ,
(20.7)
such that
du
dt = −∂V
∂u + ˜ξ(t).
(20.8)

20.3 Models of feedback effects on price ﬂuctuations
361
u
V(u)
b = 0
b > 0
Fig. 20.2. Effective potential V (u) in which the ﬁctitious ‘particle’ (representing price increments)
evolves. Here, we have set κ = γ = 0. For β > 0, corresponding to risk aversion effects, the
potential develops a ‘barrier’ separating a stable region for u ∼0 from an unstable ‘crash’ region for
u < u∗.
The linear model
Let us ﬁrst assume that non linear effects, captured by the coefﬁcients β and γ , are absent, or
negligible. The equation giving the evolution of the price then reduces to a forced harmonic
oscillator with friction:
d2x
dt2 = −α dx
dt −κ(x −x0) + ˜ξ(t).
(20.9)
For the linear process to be stable, one has to assume that α > 0, i.e. that trend following
effects are not too strong. On short time scales, mean reversion effects to the fundamental
price are expected to be small. The above equation then describes the price changes as an
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process; the price increment correlation function is given by:
⟨u(t)u(t + τ)⟩= D
2α e−ατ,
(20.10)
where D is the variance of ˜ξ(t). The volatility ⟨u(t)2⟩is equal to D/2α ∝χ2/λ(a′ −a). This
means that the volatility is higher when the market participants react strongly to external
news (χ large) or when the market is not very deep (λ small), as expected. We also ﬁnd
that the volatility diverges as the trend following effects (a) tend to outweight the market
liquidity (a′).
The above result, Eq. (20.10) also shows that for time lags much larger than 1/α (but
sufﬁciently small such that κ can be neglected), price increments are uncorrelated and
the price behaves diffusively. On shorter time scales, however, some positive correlations
appear, that lead to a superdiffusive behaviour.
On very long time scales, on the other hand, the price difference x −x0 becomes large
and κ cannot be neglected. The process becomes an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck on the price itself,

362
Simple mechanisms for anomalous price statistics
and the price variogram reads:
⟨(x(t + τ) −x(t))2⟩= D
κα

1 −exp

−κτ
α

ατ ≫1.
(20.11)
In this model, the price is therefore superdiffusive on short time scales, diffusive on
intermediate time scales and subdiffusive on very long time scales. On very long time
scales, however, the assumption that the reference price x0 is constant becomes unjustiﬁed,
and one should then also take into account the (possibly random) evolution of the reference
price itself.
Bubbles and crashes
Suppose now that feedback effects are strong compared to the stabilizing effects: a > a′ and
b > 0, such that α < 0 and β > 0. Suppose that the initial price is x ≈x0 and that γ = 0
for simplicity. The above potential develops a minimum for a non zero value of u given by
u∗= −α/β > 0.Theﬁctitious‘particle’hoversaroundthisminimum.Thismeansthatprice
returns ﬂuctuate around a positive mean u∗that has no economic justiﬁcation (recall that a
‘true’ rise of future expectations, modeled by the parameter m, is chosen to be zero here).
This growth is entirely sustained because of trend following effects: this is a speculative bub-
ble. In a ﬁrst approximation, the price (or log price) grows linearly with time, as u∗t. Interest-
ingly, when t reaches a time tc given, within this simple approximation, by tc = α2/4βκu∗=
−α/4κ,theminimumofthepotentialceasestoexistandu ﬂowsto−∞:thebubblecollapses
and the price plummets. The price decay is again stopped by the mean reverting ‘funda-
mental’ term κ. Not surprisingly, the bubble lifetime tc is long if trend following effects are
strong (|α| large) and/or if the mean reverting fundamental effect is weak (κ small).
If trend following effects are not too strong, α is positive and V (u) has a local minimum
for u = 0, and a local maximum for u∗= −α/β < 0, beyond which the potential decreases
to −∞. A ‘potential barrier’ V ∗= αu∗2/6 separates the (meta-)stable region around u = 0
from the unstable region u < u∗(see Fig. 20.2). The nature of the motion of u in such a
potential is the following: starting at u = 0, x = x0, the ﬁctitious particle oscillates in the
vicinity of u = 0, corresponding to a Brownian-like motion of the price itself. However,
occasionally, an ‘activated’ event (i.e. driven by the news/noise term ˜ξ(t)) brings the particle
near u∗. Once the potential barrier is crossed, the ﬁctitious particle reaches u = −∞in
ﬁnite time. (The stabilizing term γ u3 would actually prevent this divergence and create
a secondary minimum for a negative value of u, corresponding to the crash regime.) In
ﬁnancial terms, the regime where u oscillates around u = 0 and where β can be neglected,
is the ‘normal’ ﬂuctuation regime. This normal regime can however be interrupted by
‘crashes’, where the time derivative of the price becomes very large and negative, due to
the risk aversion term b which destabilizes the price by amplifying the sell orders. The
interesting point is that these two regimes can be clearly separated since the average time t∗
needed for such crashes to occur is exponentially large in V ∗/D (corresponding to the time
needed to overcome the ‘barrier’ V ∗), and can thus appear only very rarely. A very long
time scale is therefore naturally generated in this model. Note that in this line of thought,

20.3 Models of feedback effects on price ﬂuctuations
363
a crash occurs because of an improbable succession of unfavorable events, and not due to
a single large event in particular. However, volatility feedback effects mean that stronger
and stronger ﬂuctuations might precede the crash, each large ﬂuctuation increasing D and
making the crash more probable.
20.3.2 A simple model with volatility correlations and tails
In this section, we show that a very simple feedback model where past high values of the
volatility inﬂuence the present market activity does lead to tails in the probability distribution
and, by construction, to volatility correlations. The present model is close in spirit to the
ARCH models which have been much discussed in this context. The idea is to write, as in
Section 7.1.2:
δxk = xk+1 −xk = σkξk,
(20.12)
where ξk is a random variable of unit variance, and to postulate that the present day volatility
σk depends on how the market feels the past market volatility. If the past price variations
happened to be high, the market interprets this as a reason to be more nervous and increases
its activity, thereby increasing σk. One could therefore consider, as a toy-model of the
feedback, the following dynamical equation:†
σk+1 −σ0 = (1 −ϵ)(σk −σ0) + gϵ|σkξk|,
0 < ϵ < 1
(20.13)
which means that the volatility would mean return towards an ‘equilibrium’ value σ = σ0,
but is continuously ‘excited’ by the observation of the past day activity through the absolute
value of the close to close price difference xk+1 −xk. The coefﬁcient g measures the strength
of the feedback coupling. Now, writing
|σkξk| = σk(⟨|ξ|⟩+ ˜ξ),
(20.14)
with ˜ξ a centered noise, and going to a continuous-time formulation, one ﬁnds that the
volatility probability distribution P(σ, t) obeys (for g ≪1) the following Fokker–Planck
equation:
∂P(σ, t)
∂t
= ϵ ∂(σ −σ0)P(σ, t)
∂σ
+ Dg2ϵ2 ∂2σ 2P(σ, t)
∂σ 2
,
(20.15)
where D is the variance of the noise ˜ξ. The equilibrium solution of this equation, Pe(σ), is
obtained by setting the left-hand side to zero. One ﬁnds:
Pe(σ) = exp(−σ0/σ)
(µ)σ 1+µ ,
(20.16)
with µ = 1 + (Dg2ϵ)−1 > 1. This is an inverse Gamma distribution, which goes to zero
very fast when σ →0, but has a long tail for large volatilities. Qualitatively, the empirical
† In the simplest ARCH model, the following equation is rather written in terms of the variance, and second term
of the right-hand side is taken to be equal to: ϵ(σkξk)2 – see Bollerslev et al. (1994).

364
Simple mechanisms for anomalous price statistics
distribution of volatility can indeed, as shown in Section 7.2.2, be quite accurately ﬁtted by
an inverse Gamma distribution.
For a large class of distributions for the random noise ξk, for example Gaussian, one can
show, using a saddle-point calculation, that the tails of the distribution of σ are bequeathed
to those of δx. The distribution of price changes has thus power-law tails, with the same
exponent µ. Interestingly, a short-memory market, corresponding to ϵ ≈1, has much wilder
tails than a long-memory market: in the limit ϵ →0, one indeed has µ →∞. In other words,
over-reactions is a potential cause for power-law tails. Similarly, strong feedback (larger g)
decreases the value of µ.
20.3.3 Mechanisms for long ranged volatility correlations
The temporal correlation function of the volatility σ can be exactly calculated within the
above model,† and is found to be exponentially decaying (as in the Heston model, see
Section 8.4), at variance with the slow power-law or logarithmic decay observed empirically.
At this point, the slow decay of the volatility can be ascribed to two rather different
mechanisms. One is the existence of traders with many different time horizons. If traders
are affected not only by yesterday’s price change amplitude |xk −xk−1|, but also by price
changes on coarser time scales |xk −xk−p| (p > 1), then the correlation function is expected
to be a sum of exponentials with decay rates given by p−1. Interestingly, if the different
p’s are uniformly distributed on a log scale, the resulting sum of exponentials is to a good
approximation decaying as a logarithm. More precisely, the following relation holds:
1
log(pmax/pmin)
 pmax
pmin
d(log p) exp(−τ/p) ≈
log(pmax/τ)
log(pmax/pmin),
(20.17)
whenever pmin ≪τ ≪pmax. This logarithmic behaviour can be compared to the logarith-
mic form of the (log-)volatility correlation function assumed in multifractal descriptions
(see Section 7.3.1). Now, the human time scales are indeed in a natural quasi-geometric
progression: hour, day, week, month, trimester, year. This could be a simple explanation –
almost trivial – for the quasi-logarithmic (or slow power-law) behaviour of the volatility
correlation.‡
Yet, some recent numerical simulations of models where traders are allowed to switch be-
tween different strategies (active/inactive, or chartist/fundamentalist) also suggest strongly
intermittent behaviour, and a slow decay of the volatility correlation function without the
explicit existence of logarithmically distributed time scales. Is there a simple, universal
mechanism that could explain these ubiquitous long range volatility correlations?
A possibility is that the volume of activity exhibits long range correlations because agents
switch between different strategies depending on their relative performance. Imagine for
example that each agent has two strategies, one active strategy (say trading every day), and
one inactive, or less active strategy. The ‘score’ of the inactive strategy (i.e. its cumulative
proﬁt) is constant in time, or more precisely equal to the long term average interest rate. The
† On this point, see: Graham & Schenzle (1982) and Bouchaud & M´ezard (2000).
‡ The ﬁngerprints, in real markets, of these human time scales have recently been unveiled in Zumbach & Lynch
(2001).

20.3 Models of feedback effects on price ﬂuctuations
365
Fig. 20.3. Bottom: Total daily volume of activity (number of players) in the Minority Game with
inactive players. Top: Variogram of the activity as a function of the time lag, τ, in log-log
coordinates. The dotted line is the square-root singularity predicted by Eq. (20.18).
score of active strategy, on the other hand, ﬂuctuates up and down, due to the ﬂuctuations
of the market prices themselves. Since to a good approximation the market prices are not
predictable, this means that the score of any active strategy will behave like a random walk,
with an average equal to that of the inactive strategy (assuming that transaction costs are
small). Therefore, on some occasions the score of the active strategy will happen to be
higher than that of the inactive strategy and the agent will be active, before the score of
the active strategy crosses that of the inactive strategy. The time during which an agent is
active is thus a random variable with the same statistics as the return time to the origin of
a random walk (the difference of the scores of the two strategies). Interestingly, the return
times tr of a random walk are well known to be very broadly distributed, asymptotically as
t−1−µ
r
with µ = 3/2, such that the average return time is inﬁnite. Hence, if one computes
the correlation of activity in such a model, one ﬁnds long range correlations due to long
periods of times where many agents are active (or inactive).†
This ‘random time strategy shift’ scenario can be studied more quantitatively in the
framework of simple models, such as the Minority Game model, introduced below. In the
version where agents can refrain from playing, ﬂuctuations of the volume of activity v(t),
due to the above mechanism, are observed: see Figure 20.3. More precisely, the volume
variogram is approximately given by:
V (τ) = ⟨(v(t) −v(t + τ))2⟩= V∞(1 −exp(−α√τ)),
(20.18)
† For more details on this argument, see: Bouchaud et al. (2001).

366
Simple mechanisms for anomalous price statistics
0
50
100
Square root of time lag t
1/2
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
Variogram
Data (Lux-Marchesi)
Random time shift mechanism
Power-law fit, v = 0.09
60000.080000.0100000.0120000.0
Fig. 20.4. Variogram of the absolute returns of the Lux-Marchesi model as a function of the square
root of the time lag, √τ, and ﬁt using Eq. 20.18. Inset: Price returns time series, exhibiting volatility
clustering. Data: courtesy of Thomas Lux.
where the small τ square root singularity is related to the power-law decay of the return
time of a one dimensional random walk (here, the score of the active strategy). Perhaps
surprisingly, this simple model also allows one to reproduce quantitatively the volume of
activity correlations observed on the New-York stock exchange market (see Fig. 7.12). This
mechanism is very generic and probably also explains why this effect arises in more realistic
market models: the only ingredient is the coexistence of different strategies with different
levels of activity (active/inactive, high frequency chartists/low frequency fundamentalists,
etc.), which switch from one to another at times determined by the return times of a random
walk (the relative scores of the strategies, the price itself, etc.). In that respect, it is interesting
to note that the same quantitative behaviour is seen in a simple agent based market model
introduced by Lux & Marchesi (1999, 2000), where agents can alternatively be chartist and
fundamentalist, according to the best performing strategy – see Fig. 20.4. Needless to say,
more work is needed to establish this simple scenario as the genuine origin of long range
volatility correlations in ﬁnancial markets.
20.4 The Minority Game
Agent-based market models, where a collection of agents with simple behavioral rules
interact and give rise to a ﬁctitious price history, were pioneered in the beginning of the
nineties, and are now intensively studied. The Minority Game was introduced in Challet
and Zhang (1997) as an extremely simpliﬁed model where the consequence of agents
heterogeneity can be studied in details. Although rather remote from real ﬁnancial markets,

20.4 The Minority Game
367
the structure of the model is extremely rich and allows one to investigate several relevant
issues.
The ‘Minority Game’ consists, for each agent, to choose at each time step between two
possibilities, say ±1. An agent wins if he makes the minority choice, i.e if he chooses at
time t the option that the minority of his fellow players also choose. The game is interesting
because by deﬁnition, not everybody can win.
Eachagenttakeshisnewdecisionbasedonthepasthistory–sayonthelast M outcomesof
the game. A strategy maps a string of M results into a decision. The number of strings is 2M;
to each of them can be associated +1 or −1. Therefore, the total number of strategies is 22M.
Each agent is given from the start a certain number of strategies from which he can try to
determine the best one. His ‘bag’ of strategies is ﬁxed in time – he cannot try new ones or
slightly modify the ones he has in order to perform better. The only thing he can do is to try
to rank the strategies according to their past performance. So he gives scores to his different
strategies, say +1 every time a strategy gives the correct result, −1 otherwise. The crucial
point here is that he assigns these scores to all his strategies depending on the outcome of
the game, as if these strategies had been effectively played. Doing this neglects the fact that
the outcome of the game is in fact affected by the strategy that the agent is actually playing
at time t.
The parameters of this model are: the number of agents N, the number of history strings
2M, and the number of strategies per agent. The last parameter does not really affect the
results of the model, provided it is larger than one. In the limit of large N and M, the only
relevant parameter is α = 2M/N. For α > αc, where αc can be computed exactly (and is
found to be equal to 0.33740 . . . when the number of strategies is equal to two, see Challet
et al. (2000a)), the game is ‘predictable’ in the sense that conditionally to a given history h,
the winning choice w is statistically biased towards +1 or −1. One can introduce a degree
of predictability q, deﬁned as:†
q = 1
2M
2M

h=1
⟨w|h⟩2
(20.19)
is non zero for α > αc, and goes continuously to zero for α →α+
c , where the game becomes
unpredictable by the agents (however, agents with, say, a longer memory M′ > M would
still be able to extract information from the history). Correspondingly, for α > αc, the
score of the strategies behave as biased random walks, with a positive or negative drift. In
this predictable (or ‘inefﬁcient’) phase, some strategies perform systematically better than
others. In the unpredictable (or ‘efﬁcient’) phase α < αc, on the other hand, the score of
all strategies behave as unbiased random walks. In particular, the time during which an
agent keep playing a given strategy is related to the ﬁrst passage time problem of a random
walk, and is therefore a power-law variable with an exponent µ = 1/2, of inﬁnite mean.
This remark is related to the mechanism for long range volatility ﬂuctuations discussed in
† The deﬁnition of q is similar to the deﬁnition of the Edwards–Anderson order parameter in spin-glasses, see
M´ezard et al. (1987). Not taking the square of ⟨w|h⟩would give zero trivially, because of the symmetry of the
game between w = 1 and w = −1.

368
Simple mechanisms for anomalous price statistics
the previous section. When the game is extended as to allow agents not too play if all their
strategies have negative scores, one ﬁnds, as a function of α, an efﬁcient active phase where
a ﬁnite fraction of agents play. In this phase, the duration of active periods of any given
agent follows a power-law distribution with an exponent µ = 1/2, thereby producing non
trivial temporal correlations in the total volume of activity (See Fig. 20.3).
The point α = αc is a critical point corresponding to a second order phase transition,
of the kind often encountered in statistical physics. The critical nature of the problem at
and around this point leads to interesting properties, such as power-laws distribution and
correlations, that may have some relations with the power-laws observed in ﬁnancial time
series. Of course, the Minority Game as such is too simple to be compared to ﬁnancial
markets: there is no price and no exchange, and it is not clear to what extent the minority
rule directly applies to ﬁnancial markets. One can argue that the optimal strategy is to act
like the majority for a while, but to pull out of the market as the minority. Notwithstanding,
there are several simple extensions of the Minority Game that reproduce, in the vicinity of
the efﬁcient/inefﬁcient transition point, some of the stylized facts of ﬁnancial time series.
However, as already discussed above in the context of the simple percolation model of
herding, why should reality spontaneously ‘self organize’ such as to lie in the immediate
vicinity of a critical point?† In the context of the Minority Game or its extensions, there
is a rather natural answer: large α corresponds to a relatively small number of agents, and
the resulting time series is to some extent predictable – and thus exploitable. This is an
incentive for new agents to join the game, therefore reducing α, until no more proﬁt can be
extracted from the time series itself. This mechanism spontaneously tunes α down to αc.‡
20.5 Summary
r Large ﬂuctuations in ﬁnancial time series can probably be ascribed to herding effects
and/or price feedback mechanisms. Herding (or imitation) effects are captured at the
simplest level by a percolation like model, where agents are randomly connected as to
create (possibly large) clusters of correlated behaviour. A more sophisticated model
also takes into account personal opinions, and leads to avalanches of opinion changes
mediated by imitation.
r Price feedback mechanisms, on the other hand, illustrate how bubbles and crashes can
emerge from trend following strategies, limited by fundamentalist mean-reverting
effects. Volatility feedback effects generically leads to fat tails in the distribution of
price changes.
† This question is of a general nature, and has been discussed in relation with ‘Self-Organized Criticality’: see
Bak (1996).
‡ A similar mechanism was argued to operate in a more sophisticated, agent-based model of markets. Small levels
of investments lead to a very smooth, predictable evolution of the price, whereas the impact of larger levels
of investment destabilizes the price dynamics and leads to an unpredictable time series. See the discussion in:
Giardina & Bouchaud (2002).

20.5 Summary
369
r Simple agent-based models, where agents switch between different strategies, can
also shed light on ﬁnancial price series. In particular, the Minority Game where
agents are allowed not to play, leads to a generic mechanism for long range volatility
correlations.
r Further reading
P. Bak, How Nature Works: The Science of Self-Organized Criticality, Copernicus, Springer, New
York, 1996.
T. Bollerslev, R. F. Engle, D. B. Nelson, ARCH models, Handbook of Econometrics, vol 4, ch. 49,
R. F Engle and D. I. McFadden Edts, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1994.
S. Chandraseckar, Stochastic problems in physics and astronomy, Rev. Mod. Phys., 15, 1 (1943),
reprinted in ‘Selected papers on noise and stochastic processes’, N. Wax Edt., Dover, 1954.
J. D. Farmer, Physicists attempt to scale the ivory towers of ﬁnance, in Computing in Science and
Engineering, November 1999, reprinted in Int. J. Theo. Appl. Fin., 3, 311 (2000).
J. Feder, Fractals, Plenum, New York, 1988.
U. Frisch, Turbulence: The Legacy of A. Kolmogorov, Cambridge University Press, 1997.
N. Goldenfeld Lectures on phase transitions and critical phenomena, Frontiers in Physics, 1992.
A. Kirman, Reﬂections on interactions and markets, Quantitative Finance, 2, 322 (2002).
M. Levy, H. Levy, S. Solomon, Microscopic Simulation of Financial Markets, Academic Press, San
Diego, 2000.
B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature, Freeman, San Francisco, 1982.
M. M´ezard, G. Parisi, M. A. Virasoro, Spin Glasses and Beyond, World Scientiﬁc, 1987.
A. Orl´ean, Le Pouvoir de la Finance, Odile Jacob, Paris, 1999.
E. Samanidou, E. Zschischang, D. Stauffer, T. Lux, in Microscopic Models for Economic Dynamics,
F. Schweitzer, Lecture Notes in Physics, Springer, Berlin, 2002.
R. Schiller, Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press, 2000.
A. Schleifer, Inefﬁcient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2000.
J. P. Sethna, K. Dahmen, C. Myers, Crackling noise, Nature, 410, 242 (2001).
D. Stauffer, A. Aharony, Introduction to Percolation, Taylor-Francis, London, 1994.
r Specialized papers: power-laws
J. P. Bouchaud, M. M´ezard, Wealth condensation in a simple model of the economy, Physica A, 282,
536 (2000).
J. P. Bouchaud, Power-laws in economics and ﬁnance: some ideas from physics, Quantitative Finance,
1, 105 (2001).
X. Gabaix, Zipf’s law for cities: an explanation, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 739 (1999).
R. Graham, A. Schenzle, Carleman imbedding of multiplicative stochastic processes, Phys. Rev., A
25, 1731 (1982).
O. Malcai, O. Biham, S. Solomon, Power-law distributions and Levy-stable intermittent ﬂuctuations
in stochastic systems of many autocatalytic elements, Phys. Rev. E, 60, 1299 (1999).
S. Solomon, P. Richmond, Power laws of wealth, market order volumes and market returns, Physica
A, 299, 188 (2001).
D. Sornette, R. Cont, Convergent multiplicative processes repelled from zero: power laws and trun-
cated power laws, J. Phys. I France, 7, 431 (1996).

370
Simple mechanisms for anomalous price statistics
D. Sornette, D. Stauffer, H. Takayasu, Market ﬂuctuations, multiplicative and percolation models,
size effects and predictions, in: The Science of Disaster, A. Bunde, H.-J. Schellnhuber, J. Kropp
Edts, Springer-Verlag, 2002.
G. Zumbach, P. Lynch, Heterogeneous volatility cascade in ﬁnancial markets, Physica A, 298, 521,
(2001).
r Specialized papers: market impact
X. Gabaix, P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou, H. E. Stanley, A Theory of Power-Law Distributions in Finan-
cial Markets Fluctuations, Nature, 423, 267 (2003).
A. Kempf, O. Korn, Market depth and order size, Journal of Financial Markets, 2, 29 (1999).
F. Lillo, R. Mantegna, J. D. Farmer, Single Curve Collapse of the Price Impact Function for the
New York Stock Exchange, e-print cond-mat/0207428.
V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, X. Gabaix, H. E. Stanley, Quantifying Stock Price Response to Demand
Fluctuations, e-print cond-mat/0106657.
r Specialized papers: herding and feedback
A. Beja, M. B. Goldman, The dynamic behavior of prices in disequilibrium, Journal of Finance, 35,
235 (1980).
J.-P. Bouchaud, R. Cont, A Langevin approach to stock market ﬂuctuations and crashes, European
Journal of Physics, B 6, 543 (1998).
R. Cont, J. P. Bouchaud, Herd behavior and aggregate ﬂuctuations in ﬁnancial markets, Macroeco-
nomics Dynamics, 4, 170 (2000). See also the numerous references of this paper for other works
on herding in economics and ﬁnance.
A. Corcos, J.-P. Eckmann, A. Malaspinas, Y. Malevergne, D. Sornette, Imitation and contrarian
behavior: hyperbolic bubbles, crashes and chaos, Quantitative Finance, 2, 264 (2002).
K. Dahmen, J. P. Sethna, Hysteresis, avalanches, and disorder induced critical scaling, Physical
Review B, 53, 14 872 (1996).
J. D. Farmer, Market Force, Ecology and Evolution, e-print adap-org/9812005, Int. J. Theo. Appl.
Fin., 3, 425 (2000).
J. D. Farmer, S. Joshi, The price dynamics of common trading strategies, Journal of Economic
Behaviour and Organisation, in press.
A. Kirman, Ants, rationality and recruitment, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 137 (1993).
A. Orl´ean, Bayesian interactions and collective dynamics of opinion, Journal of Economic Behaviour
and Organization, 28, 257 (1995).
B. Rosenow, Fluctuations and Market Friction in Financial Trading, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C., 13, 419
(2002).
r Specialized papers: agent based models
P. Bak, M. Paczuski, M. Shubik, Price variations in a stock market with many agents, Physica A, 246,
430 (1997).
S. Bornholdt, Expectation bubbles in a spin model of markets: Intermittency from frustration across
scales, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 12, 667, (2001).
J. P. Bouchaud, I. Giardina, M. M´ezard, On a universal mechanism for long ranged volatility corre-
lations, Quantitative Finance, 1, 212 (2001).
C. Chiarella, X.-Z. He, Asset price and wealth dynamics under heterogeneous expectations, Quanti-
tative Finance, 1, 509, (2001).

20.5 Summary
371
I. Giardina, J. P. Bouchaud, Bubbles, crashes and intermittency in agent based market models, Euro-
pean Journal of Physics, B31, 421 (2003); Physica A, 299, 28.
C. Hommes, Financial markets as nonlinear adaptive evolutionary systems, Quantitative Finance, 1,
149, (2001).
G. Iori A microsimulation of traders activity in the stock market: the role of heterogeneity, agents’
interactions and trade frictions, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 10, 149 (1999).
A. Kirman, J. B. Zimmermann, Economics with Interacting Agents, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg,
2001.
A. Krawiecki, J. A. Holyst, D. Helbing, Volatility clustering and scaling for ﬁnancial time series due
to attractor bubbling, Phys. Rev. Lett., 89, 158701 (2002).
B. LeBaron, A builder’s guide to agent-based ﬁnancial market, Quantitative Finance, 1, 254 (2001).
M. L´evy, H. L´evy, S. Solomon, Microscopic simulation of the stock market, Journal de Physique, I5,
1087 (1995).
T. Lux, M. Marchesi, Scaling and criticality in a stochastic multiagent model, Nature, 397, 498 (1999).
T. Lux, M. Marchesi, Volatility Clustering in Financial Markets: A Microsimulation of Interacting
Agents, Int. J. Theo. Appl. Fin., 3, 675 (2000).
R. G. Palmer, W. B. Arthur, J. H. Holland, B. LeBaron, P. Taylor, Artiﬁcial economic life: a simple
model of a stock market, Physica D, 75, 264 (1994).
M. Raberto, S. Cincotti, S. M. Focardi, M. Marchesi, Agent-based simulation of a ﬁnancial market,
Physica A, 299, 320 (2001).
H. Takayasu, H. Miura, T. Hirabayashi, K. Hamada, Statistical properties of deterministic threshold
elements: the case of market prices, Physica A, 184, 127–134 (1992).
L.-H. Tang, G.-S. Tian, Reaction-diffusion-branching models of stock price ﬂuctuations Physica A,
264 543 (1999).
r Specialized papers: the Minority Game
D. Challet: See the up to date collection of papers on the following web page: http://www.unifr.ch/
econophysics/minority.
D. Challet, Y. C. Zhang, Emergence of cooperation and organization in an evolutionary game, Physica
A, 246, 407 (1997).
D. Challet, M. Marsili, R. Zecchina, Statistical mechanics of systems with heterogeneous agents:
Minority Games, Phys. Rev. Lett., 84 1824 (2000a).
D. Challet, M. Marsili, Y.-C. Zhang, Stylized facts of ﬁnancial markets and market crashes in Minority
Games, Physica A, 276, 284 (2000b).
D. Challet, A. Chessa, M. Marsili, Y. C. Zhang, From Minority Games to real markets, Quantitative
Finance, 1, 168 (2001), and references therein.
P. Jefferies, M. Hart, P. M. Hui, N. F. Johnson, Traders dynamics in a model market, Int. J. Theo.
Appl. Fin., 3, 443 (2000).
P. Jefferies, N. F. Johnson, M. Hart, P. M. Hui, From market games to real-world markets, Eur. J.
Phys., B20, 493 (2001).
M. Marsili, R. Mulet, F. Ricci-Tersenghi and R. Zecchina, Learning to coordinate in a complex and
non-stationary world, Phys. Rev. Lett., 87, 208701 (2001).
Y. C. Zhang, Towards a theory of marginally efﬁcient markets, Physica A, 269 30 (1999).
